Author: Thomas HeywoodTitle: THE ENGLISH TRAVELLER. PROLOGUE. A strange play you are like to have, for know, We use no drum, nor trumpet, nor dumb show; No combat, marriage, not so much to-day As song, dance, masque, to bombast out a play; Yet these all good, and still in frequent use With our best poets; nor is this excuse Made by our author, as if want of skill Caused this defect; itﾕs rather his self will. Will you the reason know? There have so many Been in that kind, that he desires not any At this time in his scene, no help, no strain, Or flash thatﾕs borrowed from anotherﾕs brain; Nor speaks he this that he would have you fear it, He only tries if once bare lines will bear it: Yet mayﾕt afford, so please you silent sit, Some mirth, some matter, and perhaps some wit. DRAMATIS PERSONｮ.Two young Gentlemen: Geraldine, Delavil,Old Wincott.Young Lionel, a riotous Citizen.Old Geraldine, Father of Young Geraldine.Old Lionel, a Merchant, Father of Young Lionel.Reignald, a parasitical Serving-man.Robin, an old country Serving-man.Roger the Clown, Servant to Old Wincott.Rioter, a Spendthrift.Two Gallants, his Companions.Master Ricott, a Merchant.A Gentleman, Companion to Delavil.A Usurer and his Man.The Owner of the House, supposed to be possessed.A Tavern Drawer.Servants.Wincottﾕs Wife, a young Gentlewoman.Prudentilla, her Sister.Blanda, a Whore.Scapha, a Bawd.Two Wenches, Companions to Blanda.Bess, Chambermaid to Mistress Wincott. SCENE--London and Barnet. THE ENGLISH TRAVELLER. ACT THE FIRST. SCENE I.--_A Room in_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Young Geraldine _and_ Delavil. Delavil.  Oh, friend, that I to mine own notion  Had joined but your experience! I have  The theoric, but you the practic. Young Geraldine.  I  Perhaps have seen what you have only read of. Delavil.  Thereﾕs your happiness.  A scholar in his study knows the stars,  Their motion and their influence, which are fixed  And which are wandering, can decipher seas,  And give each several land his proper bounds;  But set him to the compass, heﾕs to seek,  When a plain pilot can direct his course  From hence unto both the Indies; can bring back  His ship and charge, with profits quintuple.  I have read Jerusalem, and studied Rome,  Can tell in what degree each city stands,  Describe the distance of this place from that--  All this the scale in every map can teach;  Nay, for a need could punctually recite  The monuments in either; but what I  Have by relation only, knowledge by travel,  Which still makes up a complete gentleman,  Proves eminent in you. Young Geraldine.  I must confess  I have seen Jerusalem and Rome, have brought  Mark from the one, from the other testimony,  Known Spain, and France, and from their airs have sucked  A breath of every language: but no more  Of this discourse, since we draw near the place  Of them we go to visit.  _Enter_ Clown. Clown.  Noble Master Geraldine, worshipful Master Delavil! Delavil.  I see thou still rememberest us. Clown.  Remember you! I have had so many memorandums from the multiplicities  of your bounties, that not to remember you were to forgot myself;  you are both most ingeniously and nobly welcome. Young Geraldine.  And why ingeniously and nobly? Clown.  Because had I given your welcomes other attributes than I have done,  the one being a soldier, and the other seeming a scholar, I should  have lied in the first, and showed myself a kind of blockhead in the  last. Young Geraldine.  I see your wit is nimble as your tongue;  But how doth all at home? Clown.  Small doings at home, sir, in regard that the age of my master  corresponds not with the youth of my mistress, and you know cold  January and lusty May seldom meet in conjunction. Delavil.  I do not think but this fellow in time may for his wit and  understanding make almanacks. Clown.  Not so, sir, you being more judicious than I, Iﾕll give you the  pre-eminence in that, because I see by proof you have such judgment  in times and seasons. Delavil.  And why in times and seasons? Clown.  Because you have so seasonably made choice to come so just at  dinner-time. You are welcome, gentlemen; Iﾕll go tell my master of  your coming. [_Exit_. Delavil.  A pleasant knave. Young Geraldine.  This fellow I perceive  Is well acquainted with his masterﾕs mind.  Oh ﾕtis a good old man. Delavil.  And she a lady  For beauty and for virtue unparalleled,  Nor can you name that thing to grace a woman  She has not in a full perfection.  Though in their years might seem disparity,  And therefore at the first a match unfit,  Imagine but his age and government,  Withal her modesty and chaste respect;  Betwixt them thereﾕs so sweet a sympathy  As crowns a noble marriage. Young Geraldine.  ﾕTis acknowledged;  But to the worthy gentleman himself  I am so bound in many courtesies,  That not the least, by all the expression  My labour or my industry can show,  I will know how to cancel. Delavil.  Oh, you are modest. Young Geraldine.  He studies to engross me to himself,  And is so wedded to my company,  He makes me stranger to my fatherﾕs house,  Although so near a neighbour. Delavil.  This approves you  To be most nobly propertied, that from one  So exquisite in judgment, can attract  So affectionate an eye. Young Geraldine.  Your character  I must bestow on his unmerited love,  As one that know I have it, and yet ignorant  Which way I should deserve it: here both come.  _Enter_ Old Wincott, _his_ Wife, _and_ Prudentilla. Wincott.  Gentlemen, welcome; but what need I use  A word so common, unto such to whom  My house was never private? I expect  You should not look for such a needless phrase,  Especially you, Master Geraldine;  Your father is my neighbour, and I know you  Even from the cradle; then I loved your infancy,  And since your riper growth bettered by travel:  My wife and you in youth were play-fellows,  And must not now be strangers; as I take it,  Not above two years different in your age. Wife.  So much he hath outstripped me. Wincott.  I would have you  Think this your home, free as your fatherﾕs house,  And to command it, as the master onﾕt;  Call boldly here, and entertain your friends,  As in your own possessions: when I seeﾕt,  Iﾕll say you love me truly, not till then;  Oh, what a happiness your father hath,  Far above me!--one to inherit after him,  Where I (Heaven knows) am childless. Young Geraldine.  That defect  Heaven hath supplied in this your virtuous wife,  Both fair, and full of all accomplishments;  My father is a widower, and herein  Your happiness transcends him. Wife.  Oh, Master Geraldine,  Flattery in menﾕs an adjunct of their sex,  This country breeds it, and for that, so far  You needed not to have travelled. Young Geraldine.  Truthﾕs a word  That should in every language relish well,  Nor have I that exceeded. Wife.  Sir, my husband  Hath took much pleasure in your strange discourse  About Jerusalem and the Holy Land:  How the new city differs from the old,  What ruins of the Temple yet remain,  And whether Sion, and those hills about,  With the adjacent towns and villages,  Keep that proportioned distance as we read;  And then in Rome, of that great pyramis  Reared in the front, on four lions mounted;  How many of those idol temples stand,  First dedicated to their heathen gods,  Which ruined, which to better use repaired;  Of their Pantheon, and their Capitol,--  What structures are demolished, what remain. Wincott.  And what more pleasure to an old manﾕs ear,  That never drew save his own countryﾕs air,  Than hear such things related? I do exceed him  In years, I must confess, yet he much older  Than I in his experience. Prudentilla.  Master Geraldine,  May I be bold to ask you but one question,  The which Iﾕd be resolved in? Young Geraldine.  Anything  That lies within my knowledge. Wincott.  Put him toﾕt.  Do, sister, you shall find him, make no doubt,  Most pregnant in his answer. Prudentilla.  In your travels  Through France, through Savoy, and through Italy,  Spain, and the Empire, Greece and Palestine,  Which breeds the choicest beauties? Young Geraldine.  In troth, lady,  I never cast on any in those parts  A curious eye of censure,[3.03] since my travel  Was only aimed at language, and to know;  These passed me but as common objects did--  Seen, but not much regarded. Prudentilla.  Oh, you strive  To express a most unheard-of modesty,  And seldom found in any traveller,  Especially of our country, thereby seeking  To make yourself peculiar. Young Geraldine.  I should be loth  Profess in outward show to be one man,  And prove myself another. Prudentilla.  One thing more:  Were you to marry, you that know these climes,  Their states and their conditions, out of which  Of all these countries would you choose your wife? Young Geraldine.  Iﾕll answer you in brief: as I observe,  Each several clime, for object, fare, or use,  Affords within itself for all of these  What is most pleasing to the man there born:  Spain, that yields scant of food, affords the nation  A parsimonious stomach, where[3.04] our appetites  Are not content but with the large excess  Of a full table; where the pleasingﾕst fruits  Are found most frequent, there they best content;  Where plenty flows, it asks abundant feasts;  For so hath provident Nature dealt with all.  So in the choice of women: the Greek wantons,  Compelled beneath the Turkish slavery,  Vassal themselves to all men, and such best  Please the voluptuous that delight in change;  The French is of one humour, Spain another,  The hot Italian has a strain from both,  All pleased with their own nations--even the Moor,  He thinks the blackest the most beautiful;  And, lady, since you so far tax my choice,  Iﾕll thus resolve you: being an Englishman,  ﾕMongst all these nations I have seen or tried,  To please me best, here would I choose my bride. Prudentilla.  And happy were that lady, in my thoughts,  Whom you would deign that grace to. Wife.  How now, sister!  This is a fashion thatﾕs but late come up.  For maids to court their husbands. Wincott.  I would, wife,  It were no worse, upon condition  They had my helping hand and purse to boot,  With both in ample measure. Oh, this gentleman  I love, nay almost dote on. Wife.  Youﾕve my leave  To give it full expression. Wincott.  In these arms, then.  Oh, had my youth been blest with such a son,  To have made my estate to my name hereditary,  I should have gone contented to my grave,  As to my bed; to death, as to my sleep;  But Heaven hath will in all things. Once more welcome;  And you, sir, for your friendﾕs sake. Delavil.  Would I had in me  That which he hath, to have claimed it for mine own;  However, I much thank you.  _Enter_ Clown. Wincott.  Now, sir, the news with you? Clown.  Dancing news, sir; for the meat stands piping hot upon the dresser,  the kitchenﾕs in a heat, and the cook hath so bestirred himself  that heﾕs in a sweat. The jack[3.05] plays music, and the spits  turn round toﾕt. Wincott.  This fellowﾕs my best clock,  He still strikes true to dinner. Clown.  And to supper too, sir: I know not how the day goes with you, but my  stomach hath struck twelve, I can assure you that. Wincott.  You take us unprovided, gentlemen;  Yet something you shall find, and we would rather  Give you the entertain of household guests  Than compliment of strangers. I pray enter.  [_Exeunt all but_ Clown. Clown.  Iﾕll stand toﾕt, that in good hospitality there can be nothing  found thatﾕs ill: he thatﾕs a good house-keeper keeps a good table,  a good table is never without good stools, good stools seldom  without good guests, good guests never without good cheer, good  cheer cannot be without good stomachs, good stomachs without good  digestion, good digestion keeps men in good health; and therefore,  all good people that bear good minds, as you love goodness, be sure  to keep good meat and drink in your houses, and so you shall be  called good men, and nothing can come onﾕt but good, I warrant you.  [_Exit_. SCENE II.--_A Room in_ Old Lionelﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Reignald _and_ Robin, _two_ Serving-men. Reignald.  Away, you Corydon! Robin.  Shall I be beat out of my masterﾕs house thus? Reignald.  Thy master! we are lords amongst ourselves,  And here we live and reign. Two years already  Are past of our great empire, and we now  Write _anno tertio_. Robin.  But the old man lives  That shortly will depose you. Reignald.  Iﾕ the meantime,  I, as the mighty lord and seneschal  Of this great house and castle, banish thee  The very smell oﾕ the kitchen; be it death  To appear before the dresser. Robin.  And why so? Reignald.  Because thou stinkﾕst of garlick. Is that breath  Agreeing with our palace, where each room  Smells with musk, civet, and rich ambergris,  Aloes, cassia, aromatic gums,  Perfumes, and powders? One whose very garments  Scent of the fowls and stables! Oh, fie, fie!  What a base nasty rogue ﾕtis! Robin.  Yet your fellow. Reignald.  Then let us put a cart-horse in rich trappings,  And bring him to the tilt-yard. Robin.  Prank it, do;  Waste, riot, and consume, misspend your hours  In drunken surfeits, lose your days in sleep,  And burn the nights in revels, drink and drab,  Keep Christmas all year long, and blot lean Lent  Out of the calendar; all that mass of wealth  Got by my masterﾕs sweat and thrifty care,  Havoc in prodigal uses; make all fly,  Pourﾕt down your oily throats, or send it smoking  Out at the tops of chimneys. At his departure,  Was it the old manﾕs charge to have his windows  Glister all night with stars? his modest house  Turned to a common stews? his beds to pallets  Of lusts and prostitutions? his buttery hatch[3.06]  Now made more common than a tavernﾕs bar?  His stools, that welcomed none but civil guests,  Now only free for pandars, whores and bawds,  Strumpets, and such? Reignald.  I suffer thee too long.  What is to me thy country; or to thee  The pleasure of our city? thou hast cows,  Cattle, and beeves to feed, oves and boves;  These that I keep, and in this pasture graze,  Are dainty damosellas, bonny girls.  If thou beﾕst born to hedge, ditch, thresh, and plough,  And I to revel, banquet and carouse;  Thou, peasant, to the spade and pickaxe, I  The battoon and stiletto, think it only  Thy ill, my good; our several lots are cast,  And both must be contented. Robin.  But when both  Our services are questioned-- Reignald.  Look thou to one,  My answer is provided.  _Enter_ Young Lionel. Robin.  Farewell, musk-cat! [_Exit_. Reignald.  Adieu, good cheese and onions; stuff thy guts  With speck and barley-pudding for digestion;  Drink whig[3.07] and sour milk, whilst I rinse my throat  With Bordeaux and canary. Young Lionel.  What was he? Reignald.  A spy, sir;  One of their hinds oﾕ the country, that came prying  To see what dainty fare our kitchen yields,  What guests we harbour, and what rule we keep,  And threats to tell the old man when he comes;  I think I sent him packing. Young Lionel.  It was well done. Reignald.  A whoreson-jackanapes, a base baboon,  To insinuate in our secrets. Young Lionel.  Let such keep  The country, where their charge is. Reignald.  So I said, sir. Young Lionel.  And visit us when we command them thence,  Not search into our counsels. Reignald.  ﾕTwere not fit. Young Lionel.  Who in my fatherﾕs absence should command,  Save I his only son? Reignald.  It is but justice. Young Lionel.  For am not I now lord? Reignald.  _Dominus-fac-totum_.  And am not I your steward? Young Lionel.  Well remembered.  This night I have a purpose to be merry,  Jovial and frolic. How doth our cash hold out? Reignald.  The bagﾕs still heavy. Young Lionel.  Then my heartﾕs still light. Reignald.  I can assure you, yet ﾕtis pretty deep  Though scarce a mile to the bottom. Young Lionel.  Let me have  To supper, let me see, a duck-- Reignald.  Sweet rogue! Young Lionel.  A capon-- Reignald.  Geld the rascal! Young Lionel.  Then a turkey-- Reignald.  Now spit him, for an infidel! Young Lionel.  Green plover, snipe,  Partridge, lark, cock, and pheasant. Reignald.  Neﾕer a widgeon? Young Lionel.  Yes; wait thyself at table. Reignald.  Where I hope  Yourself will not be absent. Young Lionel.  Nor my friends. Reignald.  Weﾕll have them then in plenty. Young Lionel.  Caviare, sturgeon, anchoves, pickle-oysters; yes,  And a potato pie; besides all these,  What thou thinkﾕst rare and costly. Reignald.  Sir, I know  Whatﾕs to be done; the stock that must be spent  Is in my hands, and what I have to do  I will do suddenly. Young Lionel.  No butcherﾕs meat;  Of that beware in any case. Reignald.  I still remember  Your father was no grazier; if he were,  This were a way to eat up all his fields,  Hedges and all. Young Lionel.  You will begone, sir? Reignald.  Yes, and you are iﾕ the way going. [_Exit_. Young Lionel.  To what may young men best compare themselves?  Better to what, than to a house new built,  The fabric strong, the chambers well contrived,  Polished within, without well beautified;  When all that gaze upon the edifice  Do not alone commend the workmanﾕs craft,  But either make it their fair precedent  By which to build another, or at least  Wish there to inhabit? Being set to sale,  In comes a slothful tenant, with a family  As lazy and debauched; rough tempests rise,  Untile the roof, which by their idleness  Left unrepaired, the stormy showers beat in,  Rot the main posts and rafters, spoil the rooms,  Deface the ceilings, and in little space  Bring it to utter ruin, yet the fault  Not in the architector that first reared it,  But him that should repair it. So it fares  With us young men; we are those houses made;  Our parents raise these structures, the foundation  Laid in our infancy; and as we grow  In years, they strive to build us by degrees,  Story on story higher; up at height,  They cover us with counsel, to defend us  From storms without; they polish us within  With learnings, knowledge, arts and disciplines;  All that is naught and vicious they sweep from us,  Like dust and cobwebs, and our rooms concealed,  Hang with the costliest hangings, ﾕbout the walls  Emblems and beauteous symbols pictured round:  But when that lazy tenant, Love, steps in,  And in his train brings sloth and negligence,  Lust, disobedience, and profuse excess,  The thrift with which our fathers tiled our roofs  Submits to every storm and winterﾕs blast,  And, yielding place to every riotous sin,  Gives way without to ruin whatﾕs within:  Such is the state I stand in.  _Enter_ Blanda _and_ Scapha; Young Lionel _retires_. Blanda.  And how doth this tire become me? Scapha.  Rather ask, how your sweet carriage and court behaviour doth best  grace you, for lovers regard not so much the outward habit as that  which the garment covers. Young Lionel.  Oh, hereﾕs that hail, shower, tempest, storm, and gust  That shattered hath this building; let in lust,  Intemperance, appetite to vice; withal,  Neglect of every goodness: thus I see  How I am sinking in mine own disease,  Yet can I not abide it. [_Aside_. Blanda.  And how this gown? I prithee view me well,  And speak with thy best judgment. Scapha.  What do you talk of gowns and ornaments,  That have a beauty precious in itself,  And becomes anything? Young Lionel.  Let me not live, but she speaks nought but truth,  And Iﾕll for that reward her. [_Aside_. Blanda.  Allﾕs one to me, become they me or not,  Or be I fair or foul in othersﾕ eyes,  So I appear so to my Lionel;  He is the glass in whom I judge my face,  By whom in order I will dress these curls,  And place these jewels, only to please him.  Why dost smile? Scapha.  To hear a woman that thinks herself so wise speak so foolishly; that  knows well, and does ill. Blanda.  Teach me wherein I err. Scapha.  Iﾕll tell thee, daughter: in that thou knowest thyself to be  beloved of so many, and settlest thy affection only upon one. Doth  the mill grind only when the wind sits in one corner, or ships only  sail when itﾕs in this or that quarter? Is he a cunning fencer that  lies but at one guard, or he a skilful musician that plays but on  one string? Is there but one way to the wood, and but one bucket  that belongs to the well? To affect one, and despise all other,  becomes the precise matron, not the prostitute; the loyal wife, not  the loose wanton. Such have I been as you are now, and should learn  to sail with all winds, defend all blows, make music with all  strings, know all the ways to the wood, and, like a good travelling  hackney, learn to drink of all waters. Young Lionel.  May I miscarry in my Blandaﾕs love,  If I that old damnation do not send  To hell before her time! [_Aside_. Blanda.  I would not have you, mother, teach me aught  That tends to injure him. Scapha.  Well, look toﾕt when ﾕtis too late, and then repent at leisure, as I  have done. Thou seest, hereﾕs nothing but prodigality and pride,  wantoning and wasting, rioting and revelling, spoiling and spending,  gluttony and gormandising--all goes to havoc. And can this hold out?  When he hath nothing left to help himself, how can he harbour thee?  Look at length to drink from a dry bottle, and feed from an empty  knapsack; look toﾕt, ﾕtwill come to that. Young Lionel.  My parsimony shall begin in thee,  And instantly; for from this hour, I vow  That thou no more shalt drink upon my cost,  Nor taste the smallest fragment from my board;  Iﾕll see thee starve iﾕ the street first. [_Aside_. Scapha.  Live to one man! a jest; thou mayst as well tie thyself to one gown;  and what fool but will change with the fashion? Yes, do, confine  thyself to one garment, and use no variety, and see how soon it will  rot, and turn to rags. Young Lionel. [_Coming forward_.]  Those rags be thy reward!--Oh, my sweet Blanda,  Only for thee I wish my father dead,  And neﾕer to rouse us from our sweet delight;  But for this hag, this beldam, she whose back  Hath made her items in my mercerﾕs books;  Whose ravenous guts I have stuffed with delicates,  Nay even to surfeit; and whose frozen blood  I have warmed with aquavitｾ--be this day  My last of bounty to a wretch ingrate;  But unto thee a new indenture[3.08] sealed  Of an affection fixed and permanent.  Iﾕll love thee still, beﾕt but to give the lie  To this old cankered worm. Blanda.  Nay, be not angry. Young Lionel.  With thee my soul shall ever be at peace;  But with this love-seducer, still at war. Scapha.  Hear me but speak. Young Lionel.  Ope but thy lips again, it makes a way  To have thy tongue plucked out.  _Enter_ Rioter _and two_ Gallants. Rioter.  What, all in tempest! Young Lionel.  Yes, and the storm raised by that witchﾕs spells;  Oh, ﾕtis a damned enchantress! Rioter.  Whatﾕs the business? Blanda.  Only some few words, slipped her unawares:  For my sake make her peace. Rioter.  You charge me deeply.  Come, friend, will you be moved at womenﾕs words,  A man of your known judgment? Young Lionel.  Had you but heard  The damned erroneous doctrine that she taught,  You would have judged her to the stake. Blanda.  But, sweetheart,  She now recants those errors; once more number her  Amongst your household servants. Rioter.  Shall she beg,  And be denied aught from you? Blanda.  Come, this kiss  Shall end all former quarrels. Rioter.  ﾕTis not possible  Those lips should move in vain, that two ways plead,--  Both in their speech and silence. Young Lionel.  You have prevailed,  But upon this condition, no way else:  Iﾕll censure her, as she hath sentenced thee,  But with some small inversion. Rioter.  Speak, howﾕs that? Blanda.  Not too severe, I prithee; see, poor wretch,  She at the bar stands quaking. Young Lionel.  Now, hold up-- Rioter.  How, man, how? Young Lionel.  Her hand, I mean.--And now Iﾕll sentence thee,  According to thy counsel given to her:  Sail by one wind; thou shalt to one tune sing,  Lie at one guard, and play but on one string;  Henceforth I will confine thee to one garment,  And that shall be a cast one, like thyself,  Just past all wearing, as thou past all use,  And not to be renewed, tillﾕt be as ragged  As thou art rotten. Blanda.  Nay, sweet-- Young Lionel.  That for her habit. Scapha.  A cold suit I have onﾕt. Young Lionel.  To prevent surfeit,  Thy diet shall be to one dish confined,  And that too rifled, with as unclean hands  As eﾕer were laid on thee. Scapha.  What he scants me in victuals, would he but allow me in drink! Young Lionel.  That shall be the refuse of the flagons, jacks,  And snuffs, such as the nastiest breaths shall leave;  Of wine, and of strong-water, never hope  Henceforth to smell. Scapha.  Oh me! I faint already. Young Lionel.  If I sink in my state, of all the rest  Be thou excused; what thou proposed to her,  Beldam, is now against thyself decreed:  Drink from dry springs, from empty knapsacks feed. Scapha.  No burnt wine,[3.09] nor hot-waters! [_She swoons_. Young Lionel.  Take her hence. Blanda.  Indeed you are too cruel. Young Lionel.  Yes, to her,  Only of purpose to be kind to thee;  Are any of my guests come? Rioter.  Fear not, sir,  You will have a full table. Young Lionel.  What, and music? Rioter.  Best consort[3.10] in the city, for six parts. Young Lionel.  We shall have songs then? Rioter.  By the ear. [_Whispers_. Young Lionel.  And wenches? Rioter.  Yes, by the eye. Blanda.  Ha! what was that you said? Rioter.  We shall have such to bear you company  As will no doubt content you. Young Lionel.  Ever thine:  In youth there is a fate that sways us still,  To know whatﾕs good, and yet pursue whatﾕs ill.  [_Exeunt_. ACT THE SECOND. SCENE I.--_A Room in_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Old Wincott _and his_ Wife. Wincott.  And whatﾕs this Delavil? Wife.  My apprehension  Can give him no more true expression,  Than that he first appears a gentleman,  And well conditioned. Wincott.  That for outward show;  But what in him have you observ重 else,  To make him better known? Wife.  I have not eyes  To search into the inward thoughts of men,  Nor ever was I studied in that art  To judge of menﾕs affection by the face;  But that which makes me best opinioned of him  Is that heﾕs the companion and the friend  Beloved of him whom you so much commend--  The noble Master Geraldine. Wincott.  Thou hast spoke  That which not only crowns his true desert,  But now instates him in my better thoughts,  Making his worth unquestioned. Wife.  He pretends  Love to my sister Pru. I have observed him  Single her out to private conference. Wincott.  But I could rather, for her own sake, wish  Young Geraldine would fix his thoughts that way,  And she towards him; in such affinity,  Trust me, I would not use a sparing hand. Wife.  But Love in these kinds should not be compelled,  Forced, nor persuaded; when it freely springs,  And of itself takes voluntary root,  It grows, it spreads, it ripens, and brings forth  Such an usurious crop of timely fruit  As crowns a plenteous autumn. Wincott.  Such a harvest  I should not be the ungladdest man to see, [_Enter_ Clown.  Of all thy sisterﾕs friends.--Now, whence come you? Clown.  Who, I, sir? from a lodging of largess, a house of hospitality, and  a palace of plenty; where thereﾕs feeding like horses and drinking  like fishes; where for pints, weﾕre served in pottles; and instead  of pottle-pots, in pails; instead of silver tankards, we drink out  of water-tankards; claret runs as freely as the cocks, and canary  like the conduits of a coronation day; where thereﾕs nothing but  feeding and frolicking, carving in kissing, drinking and dancing,  music and madding, fiddling and feasting. Wincott.  And where, I pray thee, are all these revels kept? Clown.  They may be rather called reaks[3.11] than revels; as I came along  by the door I was called up amongst them--he-gallants and  she-gallants. I no sooner looked out, but saw them out with their  knives, slashing of shoulders, mangling of legs, and  lanching[3.12] of loins, till there was scarce a whole limb left  amongst them. Wincott.  A fearful massacre! Clown.  One was hacking to cut off a neck; this was mangling a breast; his  knife slipped from the shoulder, and only cut off a wing; one was  picking the brains out of a head, another was knuckle-deep in a  belly; one was groping for a liver, another searching for the  kidneys. I saw one pluck the soul[3.13] from the body--goose that  she was to sufferﾕt!; another pricked into the breast with his own  bill--woodcock to endure it! Wife.  How fell they out at first? Clown.  I know not that, but it seems one had a stomach, and another had a  stomach; but there was such biting and tearing with their teeths,  that I am sure I saw some of their poor carcasses pay forﾕt. Wincott.  Did they not send for surgeons? Clown.  Alas, no! surgeonsﾕ help was too late; there was no stitching up of  those wounds, where limb was plucked from limb; nor any salve for  those scars, which all the plaster of Paris cannot cure. Wincott.  Where grew the quarrel first? Clown.  It seems it was first broached in the kitchen, certain creatures  being brought in thither by some of the house. The cook, being a  choleric fellow, did so towse them and toss them, so pluck them and  pull them, till he left them as naked as my nail; pinioned some of  them like felons; cut the spurs from others off their heels; then  down went his spits, some of them he ran in at the throat, and out  at the backside: about went his basting-ladle, where he did so  besauce them that many a shrewd[3.14] turn they had amongst them. Wife.  But, in all this, how did the women scape? Clown.  They fared best, and did the least hurt that I saw, but for  quietness-sake were forced to swallow what is not yet digested; yet  every one had their share, and she that had least, I am sure, by  this time hath her bellyful. Wincott.  And where was all this havoc kept? Clown.  Marry, sir, at your next neighbourﾕs, Young Master Lionel, where  there is nothing but drinking out of dry-vats, and healthing in  half-tubs; his guests are fed by the belly, and beggars served at  his gate in baskets. Heﾕs the adamant of this age, the daffodil of  these days, the prince of prodigality, and the very Cｾsar of all  young citizens. Wincott.  Belike, then, ﾕtwas a massacre of meat,  Not as I apprehended? Clown.  Your gravity hath guessed aright: the chiefest that fell in this  battle were wild fowl and tame fowl; pheasants were wounded instead  of alfarez,[3.15] and capons for captains; anchoves stood for  ancients, and caviare for corporals; dishes were assaulted instead  of ditches, and rabbits were cut to pieces upon the  rebellings;[3.16] some lost their legs, whilst other of their  wings were forced to fly; the pioner undermined nothing but pie  crust, and-- Wincott.  Enough, enough! your wit hath played too long  Upon our patience.--Wife, it grieves me much  Both for the young and old man: the one graces  His head with care, endures the parching heat  And biting cold, the terrors of the lands,  And fears at sea, in travel, only to gain  Some competent estate to leave his son;  Whiles all that merchandise, through gulfs, cross-tides,  Pirates, and storms, he brings so far, the other  Here shipwrecks in the harbour. Wife.  ﾕTis the care  Of fathers; and the weakness incident  To youth, that wants experience.  _Enter_ Young Geraldine, Delavil, _and_ Prudentilla, _laughing_. Clown.  I was at the beginning of the battle; but here comes some, that it  seems were at the rifling of the dead carcases; for by their mirth  they have had part of the spoil. Wincott.  You are pleasant, gentlemen; what, I entreat,  Might be the subject of your pleasant sport?  It promiseth some pleasure. Prudentilla.  If their recreation  Be, as I make no question, on truth grounded,  ﾕTwill beget sudden laughter. Wife.  Whatﾕs the project? Delavil.  Who shall relate it? Wincott.  Master Geraldine,  If there be anything can please my ear  With pleasant sounds, your tongue must be the instrument  On which the string must strike. Delavil.  Be it his, then. Prudentilla.  Nay, hear it, ﾕtis a good one. Wife.  We entreat you,  Possess[3.17] us oﾕ the novel.[3.18] Wincott.  Speak, good sir. Young Geraldine.  I shall, then, with a kind of barbarism,  Shadow a jest that asks a smoother tongue,  For in my poor discourse, I do protest,  It will but lose its lustre. Wife.  You are modest. Wincott.  However, speak, I pray; for my sake doﾕt. Clown.  This is like a hasty pudding, longer in eating than it was in  making. Young Geraldine.  Then thus it was: this gentleman and I  Passed but just now by your next neighbourﾕs house,  Where, as they say, dwells one young Lionel. Clown.  Where I was to-night at supper. Wincott.  An unthrift youth, his father now at sea. Young Geraldine.  Why, thatﾕs the very subject upon which  It seems this jest is grounded; there this night  Was a great feast. Clown.  Why, so I told you, sir. Wincott.  Be thou still dumb; ﾕtis he that I would hear. Young Geraldine.  In the height of their carousing, all their brains  Warmed with the heat of wine, discourse was offered  Of ships, and storms at sea;[3.19] when suddenly,  Out of his giddy wildness, one conceives  The room wherein they quaffed to be a pinnace,  Moving and floating; and the confused noise  To be the murmuring winds, gusts, mariners;  That their unsteadfast footing did proceed  From rocking of the vessel: this conceived,  Each one begins to apprehend the danger,  And to look out for safety. ﾒFly,ﾓ saith one,  ﾒUp to the main-top, and discover;ﾓ he  Climbs by the bed-post to the tester, there  Reports a turbulent sea and tempest towards,  And wills them, if theyﾕll save their ship and lives,  To cast their lading overboard; at this  All fall to work, and hoist into the street,  As to the sea, what next come to their hand--  Stools, tables, trestles, trenchers, bedsteads, cups,  Pots, plate, and glasses; here a fellow whistles,  They take him for the boatswain; one lies struggling  Upon the floor, as if he swum for life;  A third takes the bass-viol for the cockboat,  Sits in the belly onﾕt, labours and rows,  His oar the stick with which the fiddler played;  A fourth bestrides his fellows, thinking to scape  As did Arion on the dolphinﾕs back,  Still fumbling on a gittern. Clown.  Excellent sport! Wincott.  But what was the conclusion? Young Geraldine.  The rude multitude,  Watching without, and gaping for the spoil  Cast from the windows, went by the ears about it;  The constable is called to atone[3.20] the broil,  Which done, and hearing such a noise within  Of imminent shipwreck, enters the house, and finds them  In this confusion. They adore his staff,  And think it Neptuneﾕs trident, and that he  Comes with his Tritons (so they called his watch)  To calm the tempest, and appease the waves;  And at this point we left them. Clown.  Come what will, Iﾕll steal out of doors, and see the end of it,  thatﾕs certain. [_Exit_. Wincott.  Thanks, Master Geraldine, for this discourse;  In troth it hath much pleased me; but the night  Begins to grow fast on us: for your parts  You are all young, and you may sit up late;  My eyes begin to summon me to sleep,  And nothingﾕs more offensive unto age  Than to watch long and late. [_Exit_. Young Geraldine.  Now good rest with you! Delavil.  What says fair Prudentilla? Maids and widows,  And we young bachelors, such as indeed  Are forced to lie in solitary beds,  And sleep without disturbance--we, methinks,  Should desire later hours than married wives,  That in their amorous arms hug their delights!  To often wakings subject, their more haste  May better be excused. Prudentilla.  How can you,  That are, as you confess, a single man,  Enter so far into these mystical secrets  Of marriage, which as yet you never proved? Delavil.  Thereﾕs, lady, an instinct innate in man,  Which prompts us to the apprehensions  Of the uses we were born to; such we are  Aptest to learn, ambitious most to know,  Of which our chief is marriage. Prudentilla.  What you men  Most meditate, we women seldom dream of. Delavil.  When dream maids most? Prudentilla.  When, think you? Delavil.  When you lie upon your backs.  Come, come; your ear.  [_Exeunt_ Delavil _and_ Prudentilla. Young Geraldine.  We now are left alone. Wife.  Why, say we be, who should be jealous of us?  This is not first of many hundred nights  That we two have been private: from the first  Of our acquaintance, when our tongues but clipped  Our motherﾕs-tongue, and could not speak it plain,  We knew each other; as in stature, so  Increased our sweet society; since your travel,  And my late marriage, through my husbandﾕs love,  Midnight hath been as mid-day, and my bed-chamber  As free to you as your own fatherﾕs house,  And you as welcome toﾕt. Young Geraldine.  I must confess  It is in you your noble courtesy,  In him a more than common confidence,  And in this age can scarce find precedent. Wife.  Most true; it is withal an argument  That both our virtues are so deep impressed  In his good thoughts, he knows we cannot err. Young Geraldine.  A villain were he to deceive such trust,  Or, were there one, a much worse character. Wife.  And she no less, whom either beauty, youth,  Time, place, or opportunity could tempt  To injure such a husband. Young Geraldine.  You deserve,  Even for his sake, to be for ever young;  And he, for yours, to have his youth renewed,  So mutual is your true conjugal love;  Yet, had the Fates so pleased-- Wife.  I know your meaning.  It was once voiced that we two should have matched;  The world so thought, and many tongues so spake;  But Heaven hath now disposed us otherways;  And being as it is, (a thing in me  Which, I protest, was never wished nor sought),  Now done, I not repent it. Young Geraldine.  In those times,  Of all the treasures of my hopes and love,  You were the exchequer, they were stored in you;  And, had not my unfortunate travel crossed them,  They had been here reserved still. Wife.  Troth, they had;  I should have been your trusty treasurer. Young Geraldine.  However, let us love still, I entreat:  That, neighbourhood and breeding will allow;  So much the laws divine and human both  ﾕTwixt brother and a sister will approve;  Heaven then forbid that they should limit us  Wish well to one another! Wife.  If they should not,  We might proclaim they were not charitable,  Which were a deadly sin but to conceive. Young Geraldine.  Will you resolve me one thing? Wife.  As to one  That in my bosom hath a second place,  Next my dear husband. Young Geraldine.  Thatﾕs the thing I crave,  And only that--to have a place next him. Wife.  Presume on that already; but perhaps  You mean to stretch it further. Young Geraldine.  Only thus far:  Your husbandﾕs old, to whom my soul doth wish  A Nestorﾕs age, so much he merits from me;  Yet if (as proof and Nature daily teach  Men cannot always live, especially  Such as are old and crazed) he be called hence,  Fairly, in full maturity of time,  And we two be reserved to after-life,  Will you confer your widowhood on me? Wife.  You ask the thing I was about to beg;  Your tongue hath spake mine own thoughts. Young Geraldine.  Vow to that. Wife.  As I hope mercy. Young Geraldine.  ﾕTis enough; that word  Alone instates me happy. Now, so please you,  We will divide, you to your private chamber,  I to find out my friend. Wife.  Nay, Master Geraldine,  One ceremony rests yet unperformed:  My vow is past, your oath must next proceed;  And as you covet to be sure of me,  Of you I would be certain. Young Geraldine.  Make ye doubt? Wife.  No doubt; but Loveﾕs still jealous, and in that  To be excused; you then shall swear by Heaven,  And as in all your future acts you hope  To thrive and prosper; as the day may yield  Comfort, or the night rest; as you would keep  Entire the honour of your fatherﾕs house,  And free your name from scandal and reproach;  By all the goodness that you hope to enjoy,  Or ill to shun-- Young Geraldine.  You charge me deeply, lady. Wife.  Till that day come, you shall reserve yourself  A single man; converse nor company  With any woman, contract nor combine  With maid or widow; which expected hour,  As I do wish not haste, so when it happens  It shall not come unwelcome. You hear all;  Vow this. Young Geraldine.  By all that you have said, I swear,  And by this kiss confirm. Wife.  Youﾕre now my brother;  But then, my second husband.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE II.--_Before_ Old Lionelﾕs _House_. _Enter, from the House_, Young Lionel, Rioter, Blanda, Scapha, _two_ Gallants, _and two_ Wenches, _as newly waked from sleep_. Young Lionel.  We had a stormy night onﾕt. Blanda.  The wine still works,  And, with the little rest they have took to-night,  They are scarce come to themselves. Young Lionel.  Now ﾕtis a calm,  Thanks to those gentle sea-gods, that have brought us  To this safe harbour: can you tell their names? Scapha.  He with the painted staff I heard you call Neptune. Young Lionel.  The dreadful god of seas,  Upon whose back neﾕer stuck March fleas. 1st Gallant.  One with the bill[3.21] keeps Neptuneﾕs porpoises,  So Ovid says inﾕs Metamorphoses. 2nd Gallant.  A third the learned poets write on,  And, as they say, his name is Triton. Young Lionel.  These are the marine gods, to whom my father  In his long voyage prays to; cannot they,  That brought us to our haven, bury him  In their abyss? For if he safe arrive,  I, with these sailors, sirens, and what not,  Am sure here to be shipwrecked. 1st Wench.  [_To_ Rioter]. Stand up stiff. Rioter.  But that the ship so totters--I shall fall. 1st Wench.  If thou fall, Iﾕll fall with thee. Rioter.  Now I sink,  And, as I dive and drown, thus by degrees  Iﾕll pluck thee to the bottom.  [_They fall_.  _Enter_ Reignald. Young Lionel.  Amain for England! See, see,  The Spaniard now strikes sail. Reignald.  So must you all. 1st Gallant.  Whence is your ship--from the Bermoothes?[3.22] Reignald.  Worse, I think from Hell:  We are all lost, split, shipwrecked, and undone.  This place is a mere quicksands. 2nd Gallant.  So we feared. Reignald.  Whereﾕs my young master? Young Lionel.  Here, man; speak, the news? Reignald.  The news is, I, and you-- Young Lionel.  What? Reignald.  She, and all these-- Blanda.  I! Reignald.  We, and all ours, are in one turbulent sea  Of fear, despair, disaster, and mischance  Swallowed. Your father, sir-- Young Lionel.  Why, what of him? Reignald.  He is--  Oh I want breath. Young Lionel.  Where? Reignald.  Landed, and at hand. Young Lionel.  Upon what coast? Who saw him? Reignald.  I--these eyes. Young Lionel.  O Heaven! what shall I do then? Reignald.  Ask ye me  What shall become of you, that have not yet  Had time of study to dispose myself?  I say again, I was upon the quay,  I saw him land, and this way bend his course.  What drunkardﾕs this, that can outsleep a storm  Which threatens all our ruins? Wake him. Blanda.  Ho, Rioter, awake! Rioter.  Yes, I am ﾕwake;  How dry hath this salt-water made me! Boy,  Give me the other glass. Young Lionel.  Arise, I say:  My fatherﾕs come from sea. Rioter.  If he be come,  Bid him be gone again. Reignald.  Can you trifle  At such a time, when your inventions, brains,  Wits, plots, devices, stratagems, and all  Should be at one in action? Each of you  That love your safeties, lend your helping hands,  Women and all, to take this drunkard hence,  And to bestow him elsewhere. Blanda.  Lift, for Heavenﾕs sake.  [_They carry_ Rioter _in_. Reignald.  But what am I the nearer, were all these  Conveyed to sundry places and unseen?  The stain of our disorders still remains,  Of which the house will witness, and the old man  Must find it when he enters; and for these   [_Re-enter_ Young Lionel _and others_.]  I am here left to answer.--What, is he gone? Young Lionel.  But whither? But into the selfsame house  That harbours him; my fatherﾕs, where we all  Attend from him surprisal. Reignald.  I will make  That prison of your fears your sanctuary;  Go, get you in together. Young Lionel.  To this house? Reignald.  Your fatherﾕs, with your sweetheart, these and all;  Nay, no more words, but do it. Blanda.  That were to  Betray us to his fury. Reignald.  I haveﾕt here  To bail you hence at pleasure; and in the interim  Iﾕll make this supposed gaol, to you as safe  From the injured old manﾕs just-incens重 spleen,  As were you now together iﾕ the Low-Countries,  Virginia, or iﾕ the Indies. Blanda.  Present fear  Bids us to yield unto the faint belief  Of the least hop重 safety. Reignald.  Will you in? All.  By thee we will be counselled. Reignald.  Shut them fast. Young Lionel.  And thou and I to leave them? Reignald.  No such thing;  For you shall bear your sweetheart company,  And help to cheer the rest. Young Lionel.  And so thou meanest to escape alone? Reignald.  Rather without,  Iﾕll stand a champion for you all within.  Will you be swayed? One thing in any case  I must advise: the gates bolted and locked,  See that ﾕmongst you no living voice be heard;  No, not so much as but a dog to howl,  Or cat to mew--all silence, that I charge;  As if this were a mere forsaken house,  And none did there inhabit. Young Lionel.  Nothing else? Reignald.  And, though the old man thunder at the gates  As if he meant to ruin what he had reared,  None on their lives to answer. Young Lionel.  ﾕTis my charge:  Remains there nothing else? Reignald.  Only the key;  For I must play the gaoler for your durance,[3.23]  To be the Mercury in your release. Young Lionel.  Me, and my hope, I in this key deliver  To thy safe trust. Reignald.  When you are fast you are safe,  And with this turn ﾕtis done.   [_Exeunt all except_ Reignald _who locks the door_.]  What fools are these,  To trust their ruined fortunes to his hands  That hath betrayed his own, and make themselves  Prisoner to one deserves to lie for all,  As being cause of all! And yet something prompts me--  Iﾕll stand it at all dangers; and, to recompense  The many wrongs unto the young man done,  Now, if I can doubly delude the old--  My brain, about it, then. Allﾕs hushed within;  The noise that shall be, I must make without,  And he that, part for gain and part for wit,  So far hath travelled, strive to fool at home:  Which to effect, art must with knavery join,  And smooth dissembling meet with impudence.  Iﾕll do my best, and howsoeﾕer it prove,  My praise or shame, ﾕtis but a servantﾕs love. [_Retires_.  _Enter_ Old Lionel, _with_ Watermen, _and two_ Servants _with  burdens and caskets_. Old Lionel.  Discharge these honest sailors that have brought  Our chests ashore, and pray them have a care  Those merchandise be safe we left aboard.  As Heaven hath blessed us with a fortunate voyage,  In which we bring home riches with our healths,  So let not us prove niggards in our store;  See them paid well, and to their full content. 1st Servant.  I shall, sir. Old Lionel.  Then return: these special things,  And of most value, weﾕll not trust aboard;  Methinks they are not safe till they see home,  And there repose, where we will rest ourselves,  And bid farewell to travel; for I vow  After this hour no more to trust the seas,  Nor throw me to such danger. Reignald.  I could wish  You had took your leave oﾕ the land too. [_Aside_. Old Lionel.  And now it much rejoiceth me to think  What a most sudden welcome I shall bring  Both to my friends and private family. Reignald.  Oh, but how much more welcome had he been  That had brought certain tidings of thy death! [_Aside_. Old Lionel.  But soft, whatﾕs this? my own gates shut upon me,  And bar their master entrance! Whoﾕs within there?  How, no man speak! are all asleep or dead,  That no soul stirs to open? [_Knocks loudly_. Reignald.  What madmanﾕs that who, weary of his life,  Dares once lay hand on these accurs重 gates? Old Lionel.  Whoﾕs that? my servant Reignald! Reignald.  My old master!  Most glad I am to see you; are you well, sir? Old Lionel.  Thou seest I am. Reignald.  But are you sure you are?  Feel you no change about you? Pray you stand off. Old Lionel.  What strange and unexpected greetingﾕs this,  That thus a man may knock at his own gates,  Beat with his hands and feet, and call thus loud,  And no man give him entrance? Reignald.  Said you, sir--  Did your hand touch that hammer? Old Lionel.  Why, whose else? Reignald.  But are you sure you touched it? Old Lionel.  How else, I prithee,  Could I have made this noise? Reignald.  You touched it then? Old Lionel.  I tell thee yet I did. Reignald.  Oh, for the love I bear you--  O me most miserable! you, for your own sake,  Of all alive most wretched!--did you touch it? Old Lionel.  Why, say I did? Reignald.  You have then a sin committed,  No sacrifice can expiate, to the dead;  But yet I hope you did not. Old Lionel.  ﾕTis past hope;  The deed is done, and I repent it not. Reignald.  You and all yours will doﾕt. In this one rashness,  You have undone us all: pray be not desperate,  But first thank Heaven that you have escaped thus well.  Come from the gate--yet further, further yet--  And tempt your fate no more; command your servants  Give off and come no nearer; they are ignorant,  And do not know the danger, therefore pity  That they should perish inﾕt. ﾕTis full seven months  Since any of your house durst once set foot  Over that threshold. Old Lionel.  Prithee speak the cause? Reignald.  First look about; beware that no man hear;  Command these to remove. Old Lionel.  Begone.--[_Exeunt_ Servants _and_ Watermen].--Now speak. Reignald.  Oh, sir, this house is grown prodigious,[3.24]  Fatal, disastrous unto you and yours. Old Lionel.  What fatal? what disastrous? Reignald.  Some host, that hath been owner of this house,  In it his guest hath slain; and we suspect  ﾕTwas he of whom you bought it. Old Lionel.  How came this  Discovered to you first? Reignald.  Iﾕll tell you, sir;  But further from the gate. Your son one night  Supped late abroad, I within--oh, that night  I never shall forget! Being safe got home,  I saw him in his chamber laid to rest;  And after went to mine, and, being drowsy,  Forgot by chance to put the candle out:  Being dead asleep, your son, affrighted, calls  So loud that I soon wakened, brought in light,  And found him almost drowned in fearful sweat;  Amazed to seeﾕt, I did demand the cause,  Who told me that this murdered ghost appeared,  His body gashed, and all oﾕer-stuck with wounds,  And spake to him as follows. Old Lionel.  Oh, proceed;  ﾕTis that I long to hear. Reignald.  ﾒI am,ﾓ quoth he,  ﾒA transmarine by birth, who came well stored  With gold and jewels to this fatal house,  Where, seeking safety, I encountered death:  The covetous merchant, landlord of this rent,  To whom I gave my life and wealth in charge,  Freely to enjoy the one, robbed me of both:  Here was my body buried, here my ghost  Must ever walk, till that have Christian right;  Till when, my habitation must be here.  Then fly, young man; remove thy family,  And seek some safer dwelling; for my death  This mansion is accursed; ﾕtis my possession,  Bought at the dear rate of my life and blood:  None enter here, that aims at his own good.ﾓ  And with this charge he vanished. Old Lionel.  O my fear!  Whither wilt thou transport me? Reignald.  I entreat  Keep further from the gate, and fly. Old Lionel.  Fly whither?  Why dost not thou fly too? Reignald.  What need I fear?  The ghost and I am friends. Old Lionel.  But Reignald---- Reignald. [_Turning round_.]  Tush!  I nothing have deserved, nor aught transgressed:  I came not near the gate. Old Lionel.  To whom was that thou spakest? Reignald.  Wasﾕt you, sir, named me?  Now as I live, I thought the dead man called,  To inquire for him that thundered at the gate  Which he so dearly paid for. Are you mad,  To stand a foreseen danger? Old Lionel.  What shall I do? Reignald.  Cover your head and fly, lest, looking back,  You spy your own confusion. Old Lionel.  Why dost thou not fly too? Reignald.  I tell you, sir,  The ghost and I am friends. Old Lionel.  Why didst thou quake then? Reignald.  In fear lest some mischance may fall on you,  That have the dead offended; for my part,  The ghost and I am friends. Why fly you not,  Since here you are not safe? Old Lionel.  Some blest powers guard me! Reignald.  Nay, sir,  Iﾕll not forsake you.--[_Exit_ Old Lionel.]--I have got the start;  But ere the goal, ﾕtwill ask both brain and art. [_Exit_. ACT THE THIRD. SCENE I.--_The Dining Hall in_ Old Geraldineﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Old Geraldine, Young Geraldine, Wincott _and his_ Wife, Delavil, _and_ Prudentilla. Wincott.  We are bound to you, kind Master Geraldine,  For this great entertainment; troth, your cost  Hath much exceeded common neighbourhood;  You have feasted us like princes. Old Geraldine.  This, and more  Many degrees, can never countervail[3.25]  The oft and frequent welcomes given my son:  You have took him from me quite, and have, I think,  Adopted him into your family,  He stays with me so seldom. Wincott.  And in this,  By trusting him to me, of whom yourself  May have both use and pleasure, youﾕre as kind  As moneyed men, that might make benefit  Of what they are possessed, yet to their friends  In need will lend it gratis. Wife.  And, like such  As are indebted more than they can pay,  We more and more confess ourselves engaged  To you for your forbearance. Prudentilla.  Yet you see,  Like debtors, such as would not break their day,[3.26]  The treasure late received we tender back,  The which, the longer you can spare, you still  The more shall bind us to you. Old Geraldine.  Most kind ladies,  Worthy you are to borrow, that return  The principal with such large use[3.27] of thanks. Delavil.  [_Aside_.] What strange felicity these rich men take  To talk of borrowing, lending, and of use!  The usurerﾕs language right. Wincott.  Youﾕve, Master Geraldine,  Fair walks and gardens; I have prais重 them  Both to my wife and sister. Old Geraldine.  You would see them?  There is no pleasure that the house can yield  That can be debarred from you.--Prithee, son,  Be thou the usher to those mounts and prospects  May one day call thee master. Young Geraldine.  Sir, I shall.--  Please you to walk? Prudentilla.  What, Master Delavil,  Will you not bear us company? Delavil.  ﾕTis not fit  That we should leave our noble host alone.  Be you my friendﾕs charge, and this old man mine. Prudentilla.  Well, beﾕt then at your pleasure.  [_Exeunt all but_ Delavil _and_ Old Geraldine. Delavil.  You to your prospects, but thereﾕs project here  Thatﾕs of another nature.--Worthy sir,  I cannot but approve your happiness  To be the father of so brave a son,  So every way accomplished and made up,  In which my voice is least; for I, alas!  Bear but a mean part in the common choir,  When with much louder accents of his praise  So all the world reports him. Old Geraldine.  Thank my stars,  They have lent me one who, as he always was  And is my present joy, if their aspect  Be no ways to our goods malevolent,  May be my future comfort. Delavil.  Yet must I hold him happy above others,  As one that solely to himself enjoys  What many others aim at, but in vain. Old Geraldine.  How mean you that? Delavil.  So beautiful a mistress. Old Geraldine.  A mistress, said you? Delavil.  Yes, sir, or a friend,  Whether you please to style her. Old Geraldine.  Mistress! friend!  Pray be more open-languaged. Delavil.  And indeed  Who can blame him to absent himself from home,  And make his fatherﾕs house but as a grange[3.28]  For a beauty so attractive? or blame her,  Hugging so weak an old man in her arms,  To make a new choice of an equal youth,  Being in him so perfect? Yet, in troth,  I think they both are honest. Old Geraldine.  You have, sir,  Possessed me with such strange fancies-- Delavil.  For my part,  How can I love the person of your son,  And not his reputation? His repair  So often to the house is voiced by all,  And frequent in the mouths of the whole country:  Some, equally addicted, praise his happiness,[3.29]  But others, more censorious and austere,  Blame and reprove a course so dissolute;  Each one in general pity the good man,  As one unfriendly dealt with, yet in my conscience  I think them truly honest. Old Geraldine.  ﾕTis suspicious. Delavil.  True, sir, at best; but what when scandalous tongues  Will make the worst, and whatﾕs good in itself,  Sully and stain by fabulous misreport?  For let men live as chary as they can,  Their lives are often questioned; then no wonder  If such as give occasion of suspicion  Be subject to this scandal. What I speak  Is as a noble friend unto your son;  And therefore, as I glory in his fame,  I suffer in his wrong; for, as I live,  I think they both are honest. Old Geraldine.  Howsoever,  I wish them so. Delavil.  Some course might be devised  To stop this clamour ere it grow too rank,  Lest that which yet but inconvenience seems  May turn to greater mischief: this I speak  In zeal to both,--in sovereign care of him  As of a friend, and tender of her honour  As one to whom I hope to be allied  By marriage with her sister. Old Geraldine.  I much thank you,  For you have clearly given me light of that  Till now I never dreamt on. Delavil.  ﾕTis my love,  And therefore I entreat you make not me  To be the first reporter. Old Geraldine.  You have done  The office of a noble gentleman,  And shall not be so injured.  _Re-enter_ Wincott _and his_ Wife, Young Geraldine, _and_  Prudentilla; _the_ ladies _wearing flowers_. Wincott.  See, Master Geraldine,  How bold we are; especially these ladies  Play little better than the thieves with you,  For they have robbed your garden. Wife.  You might, sir,  Better have termed it sauciness than theft;  You see we blush not what we took in private  To wear in public view. Prudentilla.  Besides, these cannot  Be missed out of so many; in full fields  The gleanings are allowed. Old Geraldine.  These and the rest  Are, ladies, at your service. Wincott.  Now to horse:  But one thing, ere we part, I must entreat,  In which my wife will be joint suitor with me,  My sister too. Old Geraldine.  In what, I pray? Wincott.  That he  Which brought us hither may but bring us home;  Your much-respected son. Old Geraldine.  How men are born  To woo their own disasters! [_Aside_. Wife.  But to see us  From whence he brought us, sir, thatﾕs all. Old Geraldine.  This second motion[3.30] makes it palpable.  To note a womanﾕs cunning! Make her husband  Bawd to her own lascivious appetite,  And to solicit his own shame! [_Aside_. Prudentilla.  Nay, sir;  When all of us join in so small a suit,  It were some injury to be denied. Old Geraldine.  And work her sister too! What will not woman  To accomplish her own ends? But this disease  Iﾕll seek to physic ere it grow too far.-- [_Aside_.  I am most sorry to be urged, sweet friends,  In what at this time I can no ways grant;  Most, that these ladies should be aught denied,  To whom I owe all service; but occasions  Of weighty and important consequence,  Such as concern the best of my estate,  Call him aside. Excuse us both this once;  Presume this business is no sooner over,  But heﾕs at his own freedom. Wincott.  ﾕTwere no manners  In us to urge it further.--We will leave you,  With promise, sir, that he shall in my will  Not be the last remembered. Old Geraldine.  We are bound to you.--  See them to horse, and instantly return;  We have employments for you. Young Geraldine.  Sir, I shall. Delavil.  Remember your last promise.  [_Exeunt_ Delavil, Wincott _and his_ Wife, Prudentilla, _and_  Young Geraldine. Old Geraldine.  Not to doﾕt  I should forget myself.--If I find him false  To such a friend, be sure he forfeits me;  In which to be more punctually resolved,  I have a project how to sift his soul,  How ﾕtis inclined,--whether to yonder place,   [_Re-enter_ Young Geraldine.]  The clear bright palace, or black dungeon. See,  They are onward on the way, and he returned. Young Geraldine.  I now attend your pleasure. Old Geraldine.  You are grown perfect man, and now you float,  Like to a well-built vessel, ﾕtween two currents,  Virtue and vice: take this, you steer to harbour;  Take that, to imminent shipwreck. Young Geraldine.  Pray, your meaning? Old Geraldine.  What fathersﾕ cares are, you shall never know,  Till you yourself have children. Now my study  Is how to make you such, that you in them  May have a feeling of my love to you. Young Geraldine.  Pray, sir, expound yourself; for I protest,  Of all the languages I yet have learned,  This is to me most foreign. Old Geraldine.  Then I shall;  I have lived to see you in your prime of youth  And height of fortune, so you will but take  Occasion by the forehead; to be brief,  And cut off all superfluous circumstance,  All the ambition that I aim at now  Is but to see you married. Young Geraldine.  Married, sir! Old Geraldine.  And, to that purpose, I have found out one  Whose youth and beauty may not only please  A curious eye, but her immediate means  Able to strengthen a state competent,  Or raise a ruined fortune. Young Geraldine.  Of all which  I have, believe me, neither need nor use;  My competence best pleasing as it is,  And this my singularity[3.31] of life  Most to my mind contenting. Old Geraldine.  I suspect,  But yet must prove him further.-- [_Aside_.  Say to my care I add a fatherﾕs charge,  And couple with my counsel my command--  To that how can you answer? Young Geraldine.  That I hope  My duty and obedience, still unblamed,  Did never merit such austerity,  And from a father never yet displeased. Old Geraldine.  Nay, then, to come more near unto the point:  Either you must resolve for present marriage,  Or forfeit all your interest in my love. Young Geraldine.  Unsay that language, I entreat you, sir,  And do not so oppress me; or, if needs  Your heavy imposition stand in force,  Resolve me by your counsel. With more safety  May I infringe a sacred vow to Heaven,  Or to oppose me to your strict command?--  Since one of these I must. Old Geraldine.  Now, Delavil,  I find thy words too true. [_Aside_. Young Geraldine.  For marry, sir,  I neither may nor can. Old Geraldine.  Yet whore you may,  And thatﾕs no breach of any vow to Heaven;  Pollute the nuptial bed with mechal[3.32] sin;  Asperse the honour of a noble friend;  Forfeit thy reputation here below,  And the interest that thy soul might claim above  In yon blest city! These you may, and can,  With untouched conscience. Oh that I should live  To see the hopes that I have stored so long  Thus in a moment ruined, and the staff  On which my old decrepit age should lean  Before my face thus broken; on which trusting,  I thus abortively, before my time,  Fall headlong to my grave. [_Falls on the ground_. Young Geraldine.  It yet stands strong,  Both to support you unto future life  And fairer comfort. Old Geraldine.  Never, never, son;  For till thou canst acquit thyself of scandal,  And me of my suspicion, here, even here,  Where I have measured out my length of earth,  I shall expire my last. Young Geraldine.  Both these I can:  Then rise, sir, I entreat you; and that innocency,  Which poisoned by the breath of calumny  Cast you thus low, shall, these few stains wiped off,  With better thoughts erect you. Old Geraldine.  Well, say on. [_Rises_. Young Geraldine.  Thereﾕs but one fire from which this smoke may grow,  Namely, the unmatched yoke of youth and age,  In which, if ever I occasion was  Of the smallest breach, the greatest implacable mischief  Adultery can threaten fall on me!  Of you may I be disavowed a son,  And unto Heaven a servant! For that lady,  As she is beautyﾕs mirror, so I hold her  For chastityﾕs example: from her tongue  Never came language that arrived my ear  That even censorious Cato, lived he now,  Could misinterpret; never from her lips  Came unchaste kiss, or from her constant eye  Look savouring of the least immodesty:  Further-- Old Geraldine.  Enough! One only thing remains,  Which, on thy part performed, assures firm credit  To these thy protestations. Young Geraldine.  Name it then. Old Geraldine.  Take hence the occasion of this common fame,  Which hath already spread itself so far  To her dishonour and thy prejudice:  From this day forward to forbear the house;  This do upon my blessing. Young Geraldine.  As I hope it,  I will not fail your charge. Old Geraldine.  I am satisfied.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE II.--_Before_ Old Lionelﾕs _House_. _Enter at one side_ Usurer _and his_ Man; _at the other_, Old Lionel _and his_ Servant; _behind_, Reignald. Reignald.  [_Aside_.] To which hand shall I turn me? Hereﾕs my master  Hath been to inquire of him that sold the house,  Touching the murder; hereﾕs an usuring rascal,  Of whom we have borrowed money to supply  Our prodigal expenses, broke our day,  And owe him still the principal and use.  Were I to meet them single, I have brain  To oppose both, and to come off unscarred;  But if they do assault me, and at once,  Not Hercules himself could stand that odds:  Therefore I must encounter them by turns,  And to my master first.--Oh, sir, well met. Old Lionel.  What, Reignald! I but now met with the man  Of whom I bought yon house. Reignald.  What, did you, sir?  But did you speak of aught concerning that  Which I last told you? Old Lionel.  Yes, I told him all. Reignald.  Then am I cast! [_Aside_.]--But I pray tell me, sir,  Did he confess the murder? Old Lionel.  No such thing;  Most stiffly he denies it. Reignald.  Impudent wretch!  Then serve him with a warrant; let the officer  Bring him before a justice, you shall hear  What I can say against him! ﾕSfoot! denyﾕt!  But I pray, sir, excuse me; yonderﾕs one  With whom I have some business; stay you here,  And but determine whatﾕs best course to take,  And note how I will followﾕt. Old Lionel.  Be brief, then. Reignald.  Now, if I can as well put off my use-man,  This day I shall be master of the field. [_Aside_. Usurer.  That should be Lionelﾕs man. Man.  The same, I know him. Usurer.  After so many frivolous delays,  Thereﾕs now some hope. He that was wont to shun us,  And to absent himself, accosts us freely,  And with a pleasant countenance.--Well met, Reignald,  What, is this money ready? Reignald.  Never could you  Have come in better time. Usurer.  Where is your master,  Young Lionel? it something troubles me  That he should break his day. Reignald.  A word in private. Usurer.  Tush, private me no privates;[3.33] in a word,  Speak, are my moneys ready? Reignald.  Not so loud. Usurer.  I will be louder yet. Give me my moneys;  Come, tender me my moneys. Reignald.  We know you have a throat wide as your conscience;  You need not use it now. Come, get you home. Usurer.  Home! Reignald.  Yes, home, I say; return by three oﾕclock,  And I will see all cancelled. Usurer.  ﾕTis now past two, and I can stay till three;  Iﾕll make that now my business; otherways,  With these loud clamours I will haunt thee still:  Give me my use, give me my principal. Reignald.  This burr will still cleave to me; what, no means  To shake him off! I neﾕer was caught till now.--[_Aside_.  Come, come, youﾕre troublesome. Usurer.  Prevent that trouble,  And, without trifling, pay me down my cash;  I will be fooled no longer. Reignald.  So, so, so. Usurer.  I have been still put off, from time to time,  And day to day; these are but cheating tricks,  And this is the last minute Iﾕll forbear  Thee, or thy master: once again, I say,  Give me my use, give me my principal. Reignald.  Pox oﾕ this use, that hath undone so many,  And now will confound me! [_Aside_. Old Lionel.  Hast thou heard this? Servant.  Yes, sir, and to my grief. Old Lionel.  Come hither, Reignald. Reignald.  Here, sir. [_Aside_.] Nay, now I am gone. Old Lionel.  What use is this,  What principal he talks of, in which language  He names my son, and thus upbraideth thee?  What isﾕt you owe this man? Reignald.  A trifle, sir:  Pray stop his mouth, and payﾕt him. Old Lionel.  I pay!--what? Reignald.  If I say payﾕt him, payﾕt him. Old Lionel.  Whatﾕs the sum? Reignald.  A toy, the main about five hundred pounds;  And the use fifty. Old Lionel.  Call you that a toy?  To what use was it borrowed? At my departure  I left my son sufficient in his charge,  With surplus, to defray a large expense,  Without this need of borrowing. Reignald.  ﾕTis confessed;  Yet stop his clamorous mouth, and only say  That you will payﾕt to-morrow. Old Lionel.  I pass my word! Reignald.  Sir, if I bid you, doﾕt; nay, no more words,  But say youﾕll payﾕt to-morrow. Old Lionel.  Jest indeed!  But tell me how these moneys were bestowed? Reignald.  Safe, sir, I warrant you. Old Lionel.  The sum still safe?  Why do you not then tender it yourselves? Reignald.  Your ear, sir. With this sum, joined to the rest,  Your son hath purchased land and houses. Old Lionel.  Land, dost thou say? Reignald.  A goodly house, and gardens. Old Lionel.  Now joy on him,  That whilst his father merchandised abroad,  Had care to add to his estate at home!  But, Reignald, wherefore houses? Reignald.  Now, Lord, sir,  How dull you are! This house possessed with spirits,  And there no longer stay, would you have had  Him, us, and all your other family,  To live and lie iﾕ the streets? It had not, sir,  Been for your reputation. Old Lionel.  Blessing on him,  That he is grown so thrifty! Usurer.  ﾕTis struck three;  My moneyﾕs not yet tendered. Reignald.  Pox upon him!  See him discharged, I pray, sir. Old Lionel.  Call upon me  To-morrow, friend, as early as thou wilt;  Iﾕll see thy debt defrayed. Usurer.  It is enough, I have a true manﾕs word.  [_Exeunt_ Usurer _and_ Man. Old Lionel.  Now tell me, Reignald,  For thou hast made me proud of my sonﾕs thrift,  Where, in what country, doth this fair house stand? Reignald.  [_Aside_.] Never in all my time so much to seek;  I know not what to answer. Old Lionel.  Wherefore studiest thou?  Use men to purchase lands at a dear rate,  And know not where they lie? Reignald.  ﾕTis not for that;  I only had forgot his name that sold them.  ﾕTwas, let me see--see-- Old Lionel.  Call thyself to mind. Reignald.  Non-plussed or never now; where are thou, brain?--  O sir, where was my memory? ﾕTis this house  That next adjoins to yours. Old Lionel.  My neighbour Ricottﾕs? Reignald.  The same, the same, sir; we had pennyworths inﾕt;  And I can tell you, have been offered well  Since, to forsake our bargain. Old Lionel.  As I live,  I much commend your choice. Reignald.  Nay, ﾕtis well seated,  Rough-cast without, but bravely lined within;  You have met with few such bargains. Old Lionel.  Prithee knock,  And call the master or the servant onﾕt,  To let me take free view onﾕt. Reignald.  [_Aside_.] Puzzle again on puzzle!--One word, sir:  The house is full of women; no man knows  How on the instant they may be employed;  The rooms may lie unhandsome, and maids stand  Much on their cleanliness and huswifery;  To take them unprovided were disgrace;  ﾕTwere fit they had some warning. Now, do you  Fetch but a warrant from the justice, sir;--  You understand me? Old Lionel.  Yes, I do. Reignald.  To attach[3.34]  Him of suspected murder; Iﾕll seeﾕt served,  Did he denyﾕt; and in the interim, I  Will give them notice you are now arrived,  And long to see your purchase. Old Lionel.  Counselled well;  And meet some half-hour hence. Reignald.  This plunge well passed,  All things fall even, to crown my brain at last.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE III.--_Barnet. A Street_. _Enter_ Delavil _and a_ Gentleman. Gentleman.  Where shall we dine to-day? Delavil.  At the ordinary.  I see, sir, you are but a stranger here.  This Barnet is a place of great resort,  And commonly, upon the market days,  Here all the country gentlemen appoint  A friendly meeting; some about affairs  Of consequence and profit--bargain, sale,  And to confer with chapmen; some for pleasure,  To match their horses, wager on their dogs,  Or try their hawks; some to no other end  But only meet good company, discourse,  Dine, drink, and spend their money. Gentleman.  Thatﾕs the market  We have to make this day. Delavil.  ﾕTis a commodity  That will be easily vented.--What, my worthy friend!   [_Enter_ Old Geraldine _and_ Young Geraldine.]  You are happily encountered. Oh, youﾕre grown strange  To one that much respects you. Troth, the house  Hath all this time seemed naked without you;  The good old man doth never sit to meat,  But next his giving thanks he speaks of you;  Thereﾕs scarce a bit that he at table tastes,  That can digest without a Geraldine,  You are in his mouth so frequent. He and she  Both wondering what distaste from one, or either,  So suddenly should alienate a guest  To them so dearly welcome. Old Geraldine.  Master Delavil,  Thus much let me for him apologise:  Divers designs have thronged upon us late  My weakness was not able to support  Without his help; he hath been much abroad,  At London, or elsewhere; besides, ﾕtis term,  And lawyers must be followed; seldom at home,  And scarcely then at leisure. Delavil.  I am satisfied,  And I would they were so too; but I hope, sir,  In this restraint you have not used my name. Old Geraldine.  Not as I live. Delavil.  Youﾕre noble.--Who had thought  To have met with such good company? You are, it seems,  But new alighted. Father and son, ere part,  I vow weﾕll drink a cup of sack together;  Physicians say it doth prepare the appetite  And stomach against dinner. Old Geraldine.  We old men  Are apt to take these courtesies. Delavil.  What say you, friend? Young Geraldine.  Iﾕll but inquire for one at the next inn,  And instantly return. Delavil.  It is enough.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE IV.--_Inside a Tavern_. _Enter_ Bess _and_ Young Geraldine, _meeting_. Young Geraldine.  Bess! How dost thou, girl? Bess.  Faith, we may do how we list for you, you are grown  So great a stranger: we are more beholding  To Master Delavil; heﾕs a constant guest:  And howsoeﾕer to some, that shall be nameless,  His presence may be graceful, yet to others--  I could say somewhat. Young Geraldine.  Heﾕs a noble fellow,  And my choice friend. Bess.  Come, come, he is what he is;  And that the end will prove. Young Geraldine.  And howﾕs all at home?  Nay, weﾕll not part without a glass of wine,  And meet so seldom.--Boy!  _Enter_ Drawer. Drawer.  Anon, anon, sir. Young Geraldine.  A pint of claret, quickly. [_Exit_ Drawer.] Nay, sit down:  The news, the news, I pray thee; I am sure,  I have been much inquired of thy old master,  And thy young mistress too. Bess.  Ever your name  Is in my masterﾕs mouth, and sometimes too  In hers, when she hath nothing else to think of.  Well, well, I could say somewhat.  _Re-enter_ Drawer. Drawer.  Hereﾕs your wine, sir. Young Geraldine.  Fill, boy. Here, Bess, this glass to both their healths. [_Exit_    Drawer.  Why dost thou weep, my wench? Bess.  Nay, nothing, sir. Young Geraldine.  Come, I must know. Bess.  In troth, I love you, sir,  And ever wished you well; you are a gentleman  Whom always I respected; know the passages  And private whisperings of the secret love  Betwixt you and my mistress--I dare swear,  On your part well intended, but-- Young Geraldine.  But what? Bess.  You bear the name of landlord, but another  Enjoys the rent; you dote upon the shadow,  But another he bears away the substance. Young Geraldine.  Be more plain. Bess.  You hope to enjoy a virtuous widowhood;  But Delavil, whom you esteem your friend,  He keeps the wife in common. Young Geraldine.  Youﾕre to blame,  And, Bess, you make me angry: heﾕs my friend,  And she my second self; in all their meetings  I never saw so much as cast of eye  Once entertained betwixt them. Bess.  Thatﾕs their cunning. Young Geraldine.  For her, I have been with her at all hours,  Both late and early; in her bed-chamber,  And often singly ushered her abroad:  Now, would she have been any manﾕs alive,  She had been mine. You wrong a worthy friend  And a chaste mistress; youﾕre not a good girl.  Drink that, speak better of her; I could chide you,  But Iﾕll forbear. What you have rashly spoke,  Shall ever here be buried. Bess.  I am sorry  My freeness should offend you, but yet know  I am her chamber-maid. Young Geraldine.  Play now the market-maid,  And prithee ﾕbout thy business. Bess.  Well, I shall.--  That man should be so fool重! [_Exit_. Young Geraldine.  She a prostitute!  Nay, and to him, my troth-plight, and my friend  As possible it is that Heaven and earth  Should be in love together, meet and kiss,  And so cut off all distance. What strange frenzy  Came in this wenchﾕs brain, so to surmise?  Were she so base, his nobleness is such  He would not entertain it for my sake;  Or he so bent, his hot and lust-burnt appetite  Would be so quenched at the mere contemplation  Of her most pious and religious life.  The girl was much to blame; perhaps her mistress  Hath stirred her anger by some word or blow,  Which she would thus revenge--not apprehending  At what a high price honourﾕs to be rated;  Or else some one that envies her rare virtue  Might hire her thus to brand it; or, who knows  But the young wench may fix a thought on me,  And to divert me from her mistressﾕ love,  May raise this false aspersion? Howsoever,  My thoughts on these two columns fix重 are,  Sheﾕs good as fresh, and purely chaste as fair.  _Enter_ Clown _with a letter_. Clown.  Oh, sir, you are the needle, and if the whole  county of Middlesex had been turned to a mere bottle[3.35]  of hay, I had been enjoined to have found you out, or  never more returned back to my old master: thereﾕs a  letter, sir. Young Geraldine.  I know the hand that superscribed it well;  Stay but till I peruse it, and from me  Thou shalt return an answer. [_Reads letter_. Clown.  I shall, sir. This is market-day, and here acquaintance commonly  meet; and whom have I encountered? my gossip Pint-pot, and  brim-full; nay, I mean to drink with you before I part. And how doth  all your worshipful kindred? your sister Quart, your pater Pottle  (who was ever a gentlemanﾕs fellow), and your old grandsire Gallon;  they cannot choose but be all in health, since so many healths have  been drunk out of them: I could wish them all here, and in no worse  state than I see you are in at this present. Howsoever, gossip,  since I have met you hand to hand, Iﾕll make bold to drink to  you--nay, either you must pledge me, or get one to doﾕt for you, Do  you open your mouth towards me? well, I know what you would say:  ﾒHere, Roger, to your master and mistress, and all our good friends  at home. Gramercy, gossip, if I should not pledge thee, I were  worthy to be turned out to grass, and stand no more at livery.ﾓ And  now, in requital of this courtesy, Iﾕll begin one health to you and  all your society in the cellar--to Peter Pipe, Harry Hogshead,  Bartholomew Butt, and little Master Randal Rundlet, to Timothy  Taster, and all your other great and small friends. Young Geraldine.  He writes me here  That at my discontinuance heﾕs much grieved;  Desiring me, as I have ever tendered  Or him or his, to give him satisfaction  Touching my discontent; and that in person,  By any private meeting. Clown.  Ay, sir, ﾕtis very true; the letter speaks no more than he wished me  to tell you by word of mouth. Young Geraldine.  Thou art then of his counsel? Clown.  His Privy,[3.36] anﾕt please you. Young Geraldine.  Though neﾕer so strict hath been my fatherﾕs charge,  A little Iﾕll dispense withﾕt, for his love.  Commend me to thy master, tell him from me,  On Monday night (then will my leisure serve)  I will by Heavenﾕs assistance visit him. Clown.  On Monday, sir? thatﾕs, as I remember, just the day before Tuesday. Young Geraldine.  But ﾕtwill be midnight first, at which late hour  Please him to let the garden door stand ope;  At that Iﾕll enter, but conditionally  That neither wife, friend, servant, no third soul  Save him, and thee to whom he trusts this message,  Know of my coming in, or passing out;  When, tell him, I will fully satisfy him  Concerning my forced absence. Clown.  I am something oblivious; your message would be the trulier  delivered if it were set down in black and white. Young Geraldine.  Iﾕll call for pen and ink,  And instantly despatch it.  [_Exeunt_. ACT THE FOURTH. SCENE I.--_Outside_ Ricottﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Reignald. Reignald.  Now, impudence, but steel my face this once,  Although I neﾕer blush after! Hereﾕs the house.  Ho! whoﾕs within? What, no man to defend  These innocent gates from knocking?  _Enter_ Master Ricott. Ricott.  Whoﾕs without there? Reignald.  One, sir, that ever wished your worshipﾕs health;  And those few hours I can find time to pray in,  I still remember it. Ricott.  Gramercy, Reignald,  I love all those that wish it: you are the men  Lead merry lives, feast, revel, and carouse;  You feel no tedious hours; Time plays with you--  This is your golden age. Reignald.  It was; but now, sir,  That gold is turned to worse than alchemy;  It will not stand the test. Those days are past,  And now our nights come on. Ricott.  Tell me, Reignald, is he returned from sea? Reignald.  Yes, to our grief already, but we fear  Hereafter it may prove to all our costs. Ricott.  Suspects thy master anything? Reignald.  Not yet, sir.  Now my request is, that your worship being  So near a neighbour, therefore most disturbed,  Would not be first to peach us. Ricott.  Take my word;  With other neighbours make what peace you can,  Iﾕll not be your accuser. Reignald.  Worshipful sir;  I shall be still your beadsman. Now the business  That I was sent about: the old man my master  Claiming some interest in acquaintance past,  Desires (might it be no way troublesome)  To take free view of all your house within. Ricott.  View of my house! Why, ﾕtis not set to sale,  Nor bill upon the door. Look well uponﾕt;  View of my house! Reignald.  Nay, be not angry, sir;  He no way doth disable[3.37] your estate;  As far to buy, as you are loath to sell.  Some alterations in his own heﾕd make,  And hearing yours by workmen much commended,  He would make that his precedent. Ricott.  What fancies  Should at this age possess him, knowing the cost,  That he should dream of building! Reignald.  ﾕTis supposed,  He hath late found a wife out for his son;  Now, sir, to have him near him, and that nearness  Too without trouble, though beneath one roof,  Yet parted in two families, he would build,  And make whatﾕs picked[3.38] a perfect quadrangle,  Proportioned just with yours, were you so pleased  To make it his example. Ricott.  Willingly.  I will but order some few things within,  And then attend his coming. [_Exit_. Reignald.  Most kind coxcomb!  Great Alexander and Agathocles,  Cｾsar, and others, have been famed, they say,  And magnified for high facinorous deeds;  Why claim not I an equal place with them--  Or rather a precedent? These commanded  Their subjects, and their servants; I my master,  And every way his equals, where I please,  Lead by the nose along: they placed their burdens  On horses, mules, and camels; I, old men  Of strength and wit, load with my knavery,  Till both their backs and brains ache; yet, poor animals,   [_Enter_ Old Lionel.]  They neﾕer complain of weight.--Oh, are you come, sir? Old Lionel.  I made what haste I could. Reignald.  And brought the warrant? Old Lionel.  See here, I haveﾕt. Reignald.  ﾕTis well done; but speak, runs it  Both without bail and mainprize[3.39]? Old Lionel.  Nay, it carries  Both form and power. Reignald.  Then I shall warrant him.  I have been yonder, sir. Old Lionel.  And what says he? Reignald.  Like one that offers you  Free ingress, view, and regress, at your pleasure,  As to his worthy landlord. Old Lionel.  Was that all? Reignald.  He spake to me, that I would speak to you,  To speak unto your son; and then again,  To speak to him, that he would speak to you,  You would release his bargain. Old Lionel.  By no means:  Men must advise before they part with land,  Not after to repent it: ﾕtis most just  That such as hazard and disburse their stocks,  Should take all gains and profits that accrue,  As well in sale of houses as in barter,  And traffic of all other merchandise.  _Re-enter_ Ricott; _he walks before the gate_. Reignald.  See, in acknowledgment of a tenantﾕs duty,  He attends you at the gate; salute him, sir. Old Lionel.  My worthy friend! Ricott.  Now, as I live, all my best thoughts and wishes  Impart with yours, in your so safe return;  Your servant tells me you have great desire  To take surview of this my house within. Old Lionel.  Beﾕt, sir, no trouble to you. Ricott.  None; enter boldly,  With as much freedom as it were your own. Old Lionel.  As it were mine! Why, Reignald, is it not? Reignald.  Lord, sir, that in extremity of grief  Youﾕll add unto vexation! See you not  How sad heﾕs on the sudden? Old Lionel.  I observe it. Reignald.  To part with that which he hath kept so long,  Especially his inheritance: now, as you love  Goodness and honesty, torment him not  With the least word of purchase. Old Lionel.  Counselled well;  Thou teachest me humanity. Ricott.  Will you enter?  Or shall I call a servant, to conduct you  Through every room and chamber? Old Lionel.  By no means;  I fear we are too much troublesome of ourselves. Reignald.  See what a goodly gate! Old Lionel.  It likes me well. Reignald.  What brave carved posts! who knows but here,  In time, sir, you may keep your shrievalty;[3.40]  And I be one oﾕ the serjeants! Old Lionel.  They are well carved. Ricott.  And cost me a good price, sir: take your pleasure;  I have business in the town. [_Exit_. Reignald.  Poor man, I pity him;  Hﾕath not the heart to stay and see you come,  As ﾕtwere, to take possession. Look that way, sir,  What goodly fair bay windows. Old Lionel.  Wondrous stately. Reignald.  And what a gallery, how costly ceiled;  What painting round about. Old Lionel.  Every fresh object  To good adds betterness. Reignald.  Terraced above,  And how below supported. Do they please you? Old Lionel.  All things beyond opinion. Trust me, Reignald,  Iﾕll not forego the bargain, for more gain  Than half the price it cost me. Reignald.  If you would,  I should not suffer you; was not the money  Due to the usurer, took upon good ground,  That proved well built upon? We were no fools  That knew not what we did. Old Lionel.  It shall be satisfied. Reignald.  Please you to trust me withﾕt, Iﾕll seeﾕt discharged. Old Lionel.  He hath my promise, and Iﾕll doﾕt myself.  Never could son have better pleased a father  Than in this purchase! Hie thee instantly  Unto my house iﾕ the country, give him notice  Of my arrive, and bid him with all speed  Post hither. Reignald.  Ere I see the warrant served? Old Lionel.  It shall be thy first business; for my soul  Is not at peace, till face to face I approve  His husbandry, and much commend his thrift;  Nay, without pause, begone. Reignald.  But a short journey;  For heﾕs not far that I am sent to seek:  I have got the start; the best part of the race  Is run already; what remains is small,  And, tire now, I should but forfeit all. Old Lionel.  Make haste, I do entreat thee.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE II.--_The Garden of_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Enter the_ Clown. Clown.  This is the garden gate; and here am I set to stand sentinel, and to  attend the coming of young master Geraldine. Master Delavilﾕs gone  to his chamber, my mistress to hers. ﾕTis now about midnight; a  banquet prepared, bottles of wine in readiness, all the whole  household at their rest, and no creature by this honestly stirring,  saving I and my old master; he in a bye-chamber, prepared of purpose  for their private meeting, and I here to play the watchman against  my will! [_Enter_ Young Geraldine.] Chavelah?[3.41] Stand! Who  goes there? Young Geraldine.  A friend. Clown.  The word? Young Geraldine.  Honest Roger. Clown.  Thatﾕs the word indeed; you have leave to pass freely without  calling my corporal. Young Geraldine.  How go the affairs within? Clown.  According to promise: the business is composed, and the servants  disposed; my young mistress reposed; my old master, according as you  proposed, attends you, if you be exposed, to give him meeting;  nothing in the way being interposed, to transpose you to the least  danger: and this I dare be deposed, if you will not take my word, as  I am honest Roger. Young Geraldine.  Thy word shall be my warrant, but secured  Most in thy masterﾕs promise, on which building,  By this known way I enter. Clown.  Nay, by your leave, I that was late but a plain sentinel will now be  your captain conductor: follow me.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE III.--_A Room in_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Table and stools set out, lights, a banquet_,[3.42] _wine. Enter_ Old Wincott. Wincott.  I wonder whence this strangeness should proceed,  Or wherein I, or any of my house,  Should be the occasion of the least distaste:  Now, as I wish him well, it troubles me;  But now the time grows on from his own mouth  To be resolved, and I hope satisfied.   [_Enter_ Clown _and_ Young Geraldine.]  Sir, as I live, of all my friends, to me  Most wishedly you are welcome: take that chair,  I this: nay, I entreat, no compliment.--  Attend; fill wine. Clown.  Till the mouths of the bottles yawn directly upon the floor, and the  bottoms turn their tails up to the ceiling; whilst thereﾕs any  blood in their bellies Iﾕll not leave them. Wincott.  I first salute you thus. Young Geraldine.  It could not come  From one whom I more honour; sir, I thank you. Clown.  Nay, since my master begun it, Iﾕll seeﾕt go round to all three. Wincott.  Now give us leave. Clown.  Talk you by yourselves, whilst I find something to say to  this:[3.43] I have a tale to tell him shall make his stony heart  relent. [_Exit_. Young Geraldine.  Now, first, sir, your attention I entreat:  Next, your belief that what I speak is just,  Maugre all contradiction. Wincott.  Both are granted. Young Geraldine.  Then I proceed; with due acknowledgment  Of all your more than many courtesies:  Youﾕve been my second father, and your wife  My noble and chaste mistress; all your servants  At my command; and this your bounteous table  As free and common as my fatherﾕs house:  Neither ﾕgainst any, or the least of these,  Can I commence just quarrel. Wincott.  What might then be  The cause of this constraint, in thus absenting  Yourself from such as love you? Young Geraldine.  Out of many,  I will propose some few: the care I have  Of your as yet unblemish重 renown,  The untouched honour of your virtuous wife,  And (which I value least, yet dearly too)  My own fair reputation. Wincott.  How can these  In any way be questioned? Young Geraldine.  Oh, dear sir,  Bad tongues have been too busy with us all;  Of which I never yet had time to think,  But with sad thoughts and griefs unspeakable.  It hath been whispered by some wicked ones,  But loudly thundered in my fatherﾕs ears,  By some that have maligned our happiness,  (Heaven, if it can brook slander, pardon them!)  That this my customary coming hither  Hath been to base and sordid purposes:  To wrong your bed, injure her chastity,  And be mine own undoer, which, how false! Wincott.  As Heaven is true, I knowﾕt. Young Geraldine.  Now, this calumny  Arriving first unto my fatherﾕs ears,  His easy nature was induced to think  That these things might perhaps be possible:  I answered him as I would do to Heaven,  And cleared myself in his suspicious thoughts  As truly as the high all-knowing Judge  Shall of these stains acquit me, which are merely  Aspersions and untruths. The good old man,  Possessed with my sincerity, and yet careful  Of your renown, her honour, and my fame,  To stop the worst that scandal could inflict,  And to prevent false rumours, charges me,  The cause removed, to take away the effect;  Which only could be to forbear your house--  And this upon his blessing. You hear all. Wincott.  And I of all acquit you: this your absence,  With which my love most cavilled, orators[3.44]  In your behalf. Had such things passed betwixt you,  Not threats nor chidings could have driven you hence.  It pleads in your behalf, and speaks in hers,  And arms me with a double confidence,  Both of your friendship and her loyalty:  I am happy in you both, and only doubtful  Which of you two doth most impart my love.  You shall not hence to-night. Young Geraldine.  Pray, pardon, sir. Wincott.  You are in your lodging. Young Geraldine.  But my fatherﾕs charge? Wincott.  My conjuration shall dispense with that.  You may be up as early as you please,  But hence to-night you shall not. Young Geraldine.  You are powerful. Wincott.  This night, of purpose, I have parted beds,  Feigning myself not well, to give you meeting;  Nor can be aught suspected by my wife,  I have kept all so private: now ﾕtis late,  Iﾕll steal up to my rest. But, howsoever,  Letﾕs not be strange in our writing; that way daily  We may confer without the least suspect,  In spite of all such base calumnious tongues.  So now good-night, sweet friend. [_Exit_. Young Geraldine.  May He that made you  So just and good still guard you!--Not to bed;  So I perhaps might oversleep myself,  And then my tardy waking might betray me  To the more early household; thus as I am,  Iﾕll rest me on this pallet.--But in vain:  I find no sleep can fasten on mine eyes,  There are in this disturb重 brain of mine  So many mutinous fancies. This to me  Will be a tedious night; how shall I spend it?  No book that I can spy? no company?  A little let me recollect myself.  Oh, what more wish重 company can I find,  Suiting the apt occasion, time, and place,  Than the sweet contemplation of her beauty;  And the fruition too, time may produce,  Of what is yet lent out? ﾕTis a sweet lady,  And every way accomplished: hath mere accident  Brought me thus near, and I not visit her?  Should it arrive her ear, perhaps might breed  Our lasting separation; for, ﾕtwixt lovers,  No quarrels to unkindness.[3.45] Sweet opportunity  Offers prevention, and invites me toﾕt:  The house is known to me, the stairs and rooms;  The way into her chamber frequently  Trodden by me at midnight, and all hours:  How joyful to her would a meeting be,  So strange and unexpected--shadowed too  Beneath the veil of night! I am resolved  To give her visitation in that place  Where we have passed deep vows--her bed-chamber:  My fiery love this darkness makes seem bright,  And this the path that leads to my delight,   [_Goes in at one door, and comes out at another_.][3.46]  And this the gate untoﾕt.--Iﾕll listen first,  Before too rudely I disturb her rest  And gentle breathing. Ha! sheﾕs sure awake,  For in the bed two whisper, and their voices  Appear to me unequal;--one a womanﾕs--  And hers! The other should be no maidﾕs tongue,  It bears too big a tone. And hark, they laugh--  Damnation! But list further; tﾕother sounds  Like--ﾕtis the same false perjured Delavil, traitor  To friend and goodness. Unchaste, impious woman,  False to all faith and true conjugal love;  Thereﾕs met a serpent and a crocodile,  A Sinon and a Circe. Oh, to what  May I compare you?----Out, my sword!  Iﾕll act a noble execution  On two unmatched for sordid villainy--  I left it in my chamber, and thank Heaven  That I did so! it hath prevented me  From playing a base hangman. Sin securely,  Whilst I, although for many yet less faults,  Strive hourly to repent me! I once loved her,  And was to him entire. Although I pardon,  Heaven will find time to punish: Iﾕll not stretch  My just revenge so far as once by blabbing  To make your brazen impudence to blush--  Damn on--revenge too great; and, to suppress  Your souls yet lower, without hope to rise,  Heap Ossa upon Pelion. You have made me  To hate my very country, because here bred  Near two such monsters. First Iﾕll leave this house,  And then my fatherﾕs; next Iﾕll take my leave,  Both of this clime and nation, travel till  Age snow upon this head. My passions now  Are unexpressible; Iﾕll end them thus:  Ill man, bad woman, your unheard-of treachery  This unjust censure on a just man give,--  To seek out place where no two such can live. [_Exit_. SCENE IV.--_Another Room in the House_. _Enter_ Delavil _in a nightgown, and_ Wife _in night attire_. Delavil.  A happy morning now betide you, lady,  To equal the content of a sweet night. Wife.  It hath been to my wish, and your desire;  And this your coming by pretended love  Unto my sister Prue cuts off suspicion  Of any such converse ﾕtwixt you and me. Delavil.  It hath been wisely carried. Wife.  One thing troubles me. Delavil.  Whatﾕs that, my dearest? Wife.  Why your friend Geraldine  Should on the sudden thus absent himself:  Has he had, think you, no intelligence  Of these our private meetings? Delavil.  No, on my soul,  For therein hath my brain exceeded yours:  I, studying to engross you to myself,  Of his continued absence have been cause;  Yet he of your affection no way jealous,  Or of my friendship. How the plot was cast,  You at our better leisure shall partake:  The air grows cold, have care unto your health;  Suspicious eyes are oﾕer us, that yet sleep,  But with the dawn will open. Sweet, retire you  To your warm sheets; I now to fill my own,  That have this night been empty. Wife.  You advise well:  Oh, might this kiss dwell ever on thy lips  In my remembrance! Delavil.  Doubt it not, I pray,  Whilst day frights night, and night pursues the day.  Good-morrow.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE V.--_A Room in_ Old Lionelﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Reignald _with a key in his hand_, Young Lionel, Blanda, Scapha, Rioter, _and two_ Gallants. Reignald.  Now is the gaol delivery; through this back gate  Shift for yourselves; I here unprison all. Young Lionel.  But tell me, how shall we dispose ourselves?  We are as far to seek now as at the first;  What is it to reprieve us for few hours,  And now to suffer? better had it been  At first to have stood the trial, so by this  We might have passed our penance. Blanda.  Sweet Reignald! Young Lionel.  Honest rogue! Rioter.  If now thou failﾕst us, then we are lost for ever. Reignald.  This same sweet Reignald, and this honest rogue,  Hath been the burgess under whose protection  You all this while have lived, free from arrests:  But now the sessions of my powerﾕs broke up,  And you exposed to actions, warrants, writs;  For all the hellish rabble are broke loose,  Of serjeants, sheriffs, and bailiffs. All.  Guard us, Heaven! Reignald.  I tell you as it is; nay, I myself  That have been your protector, now as subject  To every varletﾕs pestle, for you know  How I am engaged with you----At whose suit, sir? All.  Why didst thou start? [_They all start_. Reignald.  I was afraid some catchpole stood behind me,  To clap me on the shoulder. Rioter.  No such thing;  Yet I protest thy fear did fright us all. Reignald.  I knew your guilty consciences. Young Lionel.  No brain left? Blanda.  No crotchet for my sake? Reignald.  One kiss then, sweet;  Thus shall my crotchets and your kisses meet. Young Lionel.  Nay, tell us what to trust to. Reignald.  Lodge yourselves  In the next tavern; thereﾕs the cash thatﾕs left  Go, health it freely for my good success;  Nay, drown it all, let not a tester[3.47] scape  To be consumed in rot-gut:[3.48] I have begun,  And I will stand the period. Young Lionel.  Bravely spoke. Reignald.  Or perish in the conflict. Rioter.  Worthy Reignald-- Reignald.  Will, if he now come off well, fox you all;[3.49]  Go, call for wine; for singly of myself  I will oppose all danger; but I charge you,  When I shall faint or find myself distressed,  If I, like brave Orlando,[3.50] wind my horn,  Make haste unto my rescue. Young Lionel.  And die inﾕt. Reignald.  Well hast thou spoke, my noble Charlemain  With these thy peers about thee. Young Lionel.  May good speed  Attend thee still! Reignald.  The end still crowns the deed.  [_Exeunt_. SCENE VI.--_Outside_ Old Lionelﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Old Lionel, _and the former_ Owner _of the House_. Owner.  Sir, sir, your threats nor warrants can fright me;  My honesty and innocencyﾕs known  Always to have been unblemished; would you could  As well approve your own integrity  As I shall doubtless acquit myself  Of this surmis重 murder. Old Lionel.  Rather surrender  The price I paid, and take into thy hands  This haunted mansion, or Iﾕll prosecute  My wrong, even to the utmost of the law,  Which is no less than death. Owner.  Iﾕll answer all,  Old Lionel, both to thy shame and scorn;  This [_Snapping his fingers_] for thy menaces!  _Enter_ Clown. Clown.  This is the house, but whereﾕs the noise that was wont to be inﾕt? I  am sent hither to deliver a note to two young gentlemen that here  keep revel-rout; I remember it, since the last massacre of meat that  was made inﾕt; but it seems that the great storm that was raised  then is chased now. I have other notes to deliver, one to Master  Ricott--and--I shall think on them all in order. My old master makes  a great feast for the parting of young Master Geraldine, who is  presently upon his departure for travel, and, the better to grace  it, hath invited many of his neighbours and friends, where will be  old Master Geraldine, his son, and I cannot tell how many. But this  is strange; the gates shut up at this time oﾕ day! belike they are  all drunk and laid to sleep; if they be, Iﾕll wake them, with a  murrain! [_Knocks_. Old Lionel.  What desperate fellowﾕs this, that, ignorant  Of his own danger, thunders at these gates? Clown.  Ho, Reignald! riotous Reignald, revelling Reignald! Old Lionel.  What madness doth possess thee, honest friend,  To touch that hammerﾕs handle? Clown.  What madness doth possess thee, honest friend,  To ask me such a question? Old Lionel.  [_To_ Owner.] Nay, stir not you. Owner.  Not I. The game begins. Old Lionel.  How dost thou? art thou well? Clown.  Yes, very well, I thank you; how do you, sir? Old Lionel.  No alteration: what change about thee? Clown.  Not so much change about me at this time as to change you a shilling  into two testers. Old Lionel.  Yet I advise thee, fellow, for thy good,  Stand further from the gate. Clown.  And I advise thee, friend, for thine own good, stand not betwixt me  and the gate, but give me leave to deliver my errand. Ho! Reignald,  you mad rascal! Old Lionel.  In vain thou thunderﾕst at these silent doors,  Where no man dwells to answer, saving ghosts,  Furies, and sprites. Clown.  Ghosts! indeed there has been much walking in and about the house  after midnight. Old Lionel.  Strange noise oft heard? Clown.  Yes, terrible noise, that none of the neighbours could take any rest  for it. I have heard it myself. Old Lionel.  You hear this? Hereﾕs more witness. Owner.  Very well, sir. Old Lionel.  Which you shall dearly answer.--Whooping? Clown.  And hollooing. Old Lionel.  And shouting? Clown.  And crying out, till the whole house rung again. Old Lionel.  Which thou hast heard? Clown.  Oftener than I have toes and fingers. Old Lionel.  Thou wilt be deposed of this? Clown.  Iﾕll be sworn toﾕt, and thatﾕs as good. Old Lionel.  Very good still;--yet you are innocent.  Shall I entreat thee, friend, to avouch as much  Hereby to the next justice? Clown.  Iﾕll take my soldierﾕs oath onﾕt. Old Lionel.  A soldierﾕs oath--whatﾕs that? Clown.  My corporal oath; and you know, sir, a corporal is an office  belonging to a soldier. Old Lionel.  Yet you are clear? Murder will come to light. Owner.  So will your gullery[3.51] too.  _Enter_ Robin. Robin.  They say my old masterﾕs come home; Iﾕll see if he will turn me  out of doors, as the young man has done. I have laid rods in piss  for somebody; scape Reignald as he can; and with more freedom than I  durst late, I boldly now dare knock. [_Knocks_. Old Lionel.  More madmen yet! I think since my last voyage  Half of the worldﾕs turned frantic. What dost mean?  Or longﾕst thou to be blasted? Robin.  Oh, sir, you are welcome home; ﾕtwas time to come,  Ere all was gone to havoc. Old Lionel.  My old servant!  Before I shall demand of further business,  Resolve me why thou thunderﾕst at these doors,  Where thou knowﾕst none inhabits? Robin.  Are they gone, sir?  ﾕTwas well they have left the house behind;  For all the furniture, to a bare bench,  I am sure is spent and wasted. Old Lionel.  Whereﾕs my son,  That Reignald, posting for him with such speed,  Brings him not from the country? Robin.  Country, sir!  ﾕTis a thing they know not: here they feast,  Dice, drink, and drab; the company they keep,  Cheaters and roaring-lads, and these attended  By bawds and queans; your son hath got a strumpet  On whom he spends all that your sparing left;  And here they keep court, to whose damned abuses  Reignald gives all encouragement. Old Lionel.  But stay, stay:  No living soul hath for these six monthsﾕ space  Here entered, but the house stood desolate. Robin.  Last week I am sure, so late, and the other day,  Such revels were here kept. Old Lionel.  And by my son? Robin.  Yes, and his servant Reignald. Old Lionel.  And this house  At all not haunted? Robin.  Save, sir, with such sprites. Owner.  This murder will come out.  _Enter_ Ricott. Old Lionel.  But see, in happy time here comes my neighbour  Of whom he bought this mansion; he, I am sure,  More amply can resolve me.--I pray, sir,  What sums of moneys have you late received  Of my young son? Ricott.  Of him? None, I assure you. Old Lionel.  What of my servant Reignald? Ricott.  But devise  What to call less than nothing, and that sum  I will confess received. Old Lionel.  Pray, sir, be serious;  I do confess myself indebted to you  A hundred pound. Ricott.  You may do well to payﾕt then, for hereﾕs witness  Sufficient of your words. Old Lionel.  I speak no more  Than what I purpose; just so much I owe you,  And ere I sleep will tender. Ricott.  I shall be  As ready to receive it, and as willing  As you can be to pay it. Old Lionel.  But provided  You will confess seven hundred pounds received  Beforehand of my son. Ricott.  But, by your favour,  Why should I yield seven hundred pounds received  Of them I never dealt with? Why? For what?  What reason? What condition? Where or when  Should such a sum be paid me? Old Lionel.  Why? for this bargain. And for what? this house.  Reason? because you sold it. The conditions?  Such as were agreed between you. Where and when?  That only hath escaped me. Ricott.  Madness all. Old Lionel.  Was I not brought to take free view thereof,  As of mine own possession? Ricott.  I confess  Your servant told me you had found out a wife  Fit for your son, and that you meant to build;  Desired to take a friendly view of mine,  To make it your example: but for selling,  I tell you, sir, my wants be not so great  To change my house to coin. Old Lionel.  Spare, sir, your anger,  And turn it into pity. Neighbours and friends,  I am quite lost; was never man so fooled,  And by a wicked servant! Shame and blushing  Will not permit to tell the manner how,  Lest I be made ridiculous to all:  My fears are, to inherit whatﾕs yet left,  He hath made my son away. Robin.  Thatﾕs my fear too. Old Lionel.  Friends, as you would commiserate a man  Deprived at once both of his wealth and son,  And in his age, by one I ever tendered  More like a son than servant, by imagining  My case were yours, have feeling of my griefs  And help to apprehend him: furnish me  With cords and fetters; I will lay him safe  In prison within prison. Ricott.  Weﾕll assist you. Robin.  And I. Clown.  And all.--But not to do the least hurt to my old friend Reignald.  [_Aside_. Old Lionel.  His legs will be as nimble as his brain,  And ﾕtwill be difficult to seize the slave,  Yet your endeavours, pray. Peace! here he comes. _Enter_ Reignald _with a horn in his pocket; the rest withdraw_,[3.52] _excepting_ Old Lionel. Reignald.  My heart misgives, for ﾕtis not possible  But that in all these windings and indents[3.53]  I shall be found at last: Iﾕll take that course  That men both troubled and affrighted do,--  Heap doubt on doubt, and, as combustions rise,  Try if from many I can make my peace,  And work mine own atonement. Old Lionel.  [_Aside_.] Stand you close,  Be not yet seen, but at your best advantage  Hand him, and bind him fast; whilst I dissemble  As if I yet knew nothing. Reignald.  I suspect  And find thereﾕs trouble in my masterﾕs looks;  Therefore I must not trust myself too far  Within his fingers. Old Lionel.  Reignald! Reignald.  Worshipful sir. Old Lionel.  What says my son iﾕ the country? Reignald.  That to-morrow,  Early iﾕ the morning, heﾕll attend your pleasure,  And do as all such duteous children ought--  Demand your blessing, sir. Old Lionel.  Well, ﾕtis well. Reignald.  I do not like his countenance. [_Aside_. Old Lionel.  But, Reignald, I suspect the honesty  And the good meaning of my neighbour here,  Old Master Ricott. Meeting him but now,  And having some discourse about the house,  He makes all strange, and tells me in plain terms  He knows of no such matter. Reignald.  Tell me that, sir! Old Lionel.  I tell thee as it is: nor that such moneys,  Took up at use, were ever tendered him  On any such conditions. Reignald.  I cannot blame  Your worship to be pleasant, knowing at what  An under-rate we bought it; but you ever  Were a most merry gentleman. Old Lionel.  Impudent slave! [_Aside_.  But, Reignald, he not only doth deny it,  But offers to depose himself and servants  No such thing ever was. Reignald.  Now, Heaven to see  To what this world is grown to! I will make him-- Old Lionel.  Nay more, this man will not confess the murder. Reignald.  Which both shall dearly answer; you have warrant  For him already; but for the other, sir,  If he deny it, he had better-- Old Lionel.  Appear, gentlemen; [_Softly_.  ﾕTis a fit time to take him. Reignald.  [_Aside_.] I discover  The ambush thatﾕs laid for me. Old Lionel.  Come nearer, Reignald. Reignald.  First, sir,  Resolve me one thing: amongst other merchandize  Bought in your absence by your son and me,  We engrossed a great commodity of combs,  And how many sorts, think you? Old Lionel.  You might buy  Some of the bones of fishes, some of beasts,  Box-combs, and ivory-combs. Reignald.  But, besides these, we have for horses, sir,  Mane-combs and curry-combs; now, sir, for men  We have head-combs, beard-combs, ay, and cox-combs too;  Take view of them at your pleasure, whilst for my part  I thus bestow myself.  [_Whilst he climbs to the balcony, they come forward with cords and  shackles_. Clown.  Well said, Reignald; nobly put off, Reignald; look to thyself,  Reignald. Old Lionel.  Why dost thou climb thus? Reignald.  Only to practise the nimbleness of my arms and legs, ere they prove  your cords and fetters. Old Lionel.  Why to that place? Reignald.  Why! because, sir, ﾕtis your own house. It hath been  My harbour long, and now it must be my sanctuary;  Dispute now, and Iﾕll answer. Owner.  Villain, what devilish meaning hadst thou inﾕt,  To challenge me of murder? Reignald.  Oh, sir, the man you killed is alive at this present to justify it:  ﾒI am,ﾓ quoth he, ﾒa trans-marine by birthﾓ-- Ricott.  Why challenge me  Receipt of moneys, and to give abroad  That I had sold my house? Reignald.  Why! because, sir,  Could I have purchased houses at that rate,  I had meant to have bought all London. Clown.  Yes, and Middlesex too; and I would have been thy half, Reignald. Old Lionel.  Yours are great,  My wrongs insufferable. As first, to fright me  From mine own dwelling, till they had consumed  The whole remainder of the little left;  Besides, out of my late stock got at sea,  Discharge the clamorous usurer; make me accuse  This man of murder; be at charge of warrants;  And challenging this my worthy neighbour of  Forswearing sums he never yet received;  Fool me, to think my son, that had spent all,  Had by his thrift bought land; ay, and him too,  To open all the secrets of his house  To me, a stranger! O thou insolent villain,  What to all these canst answer? Reignald.  Guilty, guilty. Old Lionel.  But to my sonﾕs death, what, thou slave? Reignald.  Not guilty. Old Lionel.  Produce him then; iﾕ the meantime, and--  Honest friends, get ladders. Reignald.  Yes, and come down in your own ropes. Owner.  Iﾕll fetch a piece,[3.54] and shoot him. Reignald.  So the warrant in my masterﾕs pocket will serve for my murder; and  ever after shall my ghost haunt this house. Clown.  And I will say, like Reignald, ﾒthis ghost and I am friends.ﾓ Old Lionel.  Bring faggots; Iﾕll set fire upon the house  Rather than this endure. Reignald.  To burn houses is felony, and Iﾕll not out till I  be fired out; but, since I am besieged thus, Iﾕll summon  supplies unto my rescue. [_He winds the horn_.  _Enter_ Young Lionel, Rioter, _two_ Gallants, Blanda,  Scapha, _and others_. Young Lionel.  Before you chide, first hear me; next your blessing,  That on my knees I beg. I have but done  Like misspent youth, which, after wit dear-bought,  Turns his eyes inward, sorry and ashamed.  These things in which I have offended most,  Had I not proved, I should have thought them still  Essential things, delights perdurable;  Which now I find mere shadows, toys and dreams,  Now hated more than erst I doted on.  Best natures are soonﾕst wrought on; such was mine;  As I the offences, so the offenders throw  Here at your feet, to punish as you please;  You have but paid so much as I have wasted,  To purchase to yourself a thrifty son,  Which I from henceforth vow. Old Lionel.  See what fathers are,  That can three yearsﾕ offences, foul ones too,  Thus in a minute pardon; and thy faults  Upon myself chastise, in these my tears.  Ere this submission, I had cast thee off;  Rise in my new adoption. But for these-- Clown.  The one you have nothing to do withal; hereﾕs his ticket for his  discharge: another for you, sir, to summon you to my masterﾕs  feast,--for you, and you,--where I charge you all to appear, upon  his displeasure and your own apperils. Young Lionel.  This is my friend, the other one I loved;  Only because they have been dear to him  That now will strive to be more dear to you,  Vouchsafe their pardon. Old Lionel.  All dear to me indeed,  For I have paid forﾕt soundly, yet for thy sake  I am atoned with all; only that wanton,  Her and her company, abandon quite;  So doing, we are friends. Young Lionel.  A just condition, and willingly subscribed to. Old Lionel.  But for that villain; I am now devising  What shame, what punishment remarkable  To inflict on him. Reignald.  Why, master! have I laboured,  Plotted, contrived, and all this while for you,  And will you leave me to the whip and stocks;  Not mediate my peace? Old Lionel.  Sirrah, come down. Reignald.  Not till my pardonﾕs sealed; Iﾕll rather stand here  Like a statue, in the fore-front of your house,  For ever, like the picture of Dame Fortune  Before the Fortune play-house.[3.55] Young Lionel.  If I have here  But any friend amongst you, join with me  In this petition. Clown.  Good sir, for my sake! I resolved you truly concerning whooping, the  noise, the walking, and the sprites, and for a need can show you a  ticket for him too. Owner.  I impute my wrongs rather to knavish cunning  Than least pretended malice. Ricott.  What he did  Was but for his young master; I allow it  Rather as sports of wit than injuries;  No other, pray, esteem them. Old Lionel.  Even as freely  As you forget my quarrels made with you,  Raised from the errors first begot by him,  I here remit all free. I now am calm,  But had I seized upon him in my spleen-- Reignald.  I knew that, therefore this was my invention,  For policyﾕs the art still of prevention. Clown.  Come down, then, Reignald,--first on your hands and feet, and then  on your knees to your master.--Now, gentlemen, what do you say to  your inviting to my masterﾕs feast? Ricott.  We will attend him. Old Lionel.  Nor do I love to break good company,  For Master Wincott is my worthy friend  And old acquaintance--[Reignald _descends_.] Oh, thou crafty    wag-string!  And couldst thou thus delude me? But we are friends.--  Nor, gentlemen, let not whatﾕs hereto past,  In your least thoughts disable my estate:  This my last voyage hath made all things good,  With surplus too; be that your comfort, son.  Well, Reignald----But no more. Reignald.  I was the fox,  But I from henceforth will no more the cox--  Comb put upon your pate. Old Lionel.  Letﾕs walk, gentlemen.  [_Exeunt_. ACT THE FIFTH. SCENE I.--_Outside_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Old Geraldine _and_ Young Geraldine. Old Geraldine.  Son, let me tell you, you are ill advised,  And doubly to be blamed, by undertaking  Unnecessary travel, grounding no reason  For such a rash and giddy enterprise.  What profit aim you at, you have not reaped?  What novelty affords the Christian world,  Of which your view hath not participated  In a full measure? Can you either better  Your language or experience? Your self-will  Hath only purpose to deprive a father  Of a loved son, and many noble friends  Of your much-wished acquaintance. Young Geraldine.  Oh, dear sir,  Do not, I do entreat you, now repent you  Of your free grant, which with such care and study  I have so long, so often laboured for. Old Geraldine.  Say that may be dispensed with, show me reason  Why you desire to steal out of your country,  Like some malefactor that had forfeited  His life and freedom. Hereﾕs a worthy gentleman  Hath for your sake invited many guests,  To his great charge, only to take of you  A parting leave: you send him word you cannot--  After, you may not come. Had not my urgence,  Almost compulsion, driven you to his house,  The unkindness might have forfeited your love,  And razed you from his will; in which he hath given you  A fair and large estate; yet you of all this strangeness  Show no sufficient ground. Young Geraldine.  Then understand  The ground thereof took his first birth from you;  ﾕTwas you first charged me to forbear the house,  And that upon your blessing. Let it not then  Offend you, sir, if I so great a charge  Have strived to keep so strictly. Old Geraldine.  Me perhaps  You may appease, and with small difficulty,  Because a father; but how satisfy  Their dear and, on your part, unmerited love?  But this your last obedience may salve all.  We now grow near the house. Young Geraldine.  Whose doors, to me,  Appear as horrid as the gates of Hell.  Where shall I borrow patience, or from whence,  To give a meeting to this viperous brood  Of friend and mistress?  [_They enter the house_. SCENE II.--_A Room in_ Old Wincottﾕs _House_. _Enter_ Wincott, _his_ Wife, _the two_ Lionels, Owner, Delavil, Prudentilla, Reignald, _and_ Rioter. Wincott.  Youﾕve entertained me with a strange discourse  Of your manﾕs knavish wit; but I rejoice  That in your safe return all ends so well.  Most welcome you, and you, and indeed all;  To whom I am bound, that at so short a warning,  Thus friendly, you will deign to visit me. Old Lionel.  It seems my absence hath begot some sport;  Thank my kind servant here. Reignald.  Not so much worth, sir. Old Lionel.  But, though their riots tripped at my estate,  They have not quite oﾕerthrown it.  _Enter_ Old _and_ Young Geraldine. Wincott.  But see, gentlemen,  These whom we most expected come at length.  This I proclaim the master of the feast,  In which, to express the bounty of my love,  Iﾕll show myself no niggard. Young Geraldine.  Your choice favours  I still taste in abundance. Wife.  Methinks it would not misbecome me, sir,  To chide your absence, that have made yourself  To us so long a stranger.  [Young Geraldine _turns sadly away_. Young Geraldine.  Pardon me, sir,  That have not yet, since your return from sea,  Voted[3.56] the least fit opportunity  To entertain you with a kind salute. Old Lionel.  Most kindly, sir, I thank you. Delavil.  Methinks, friend,  You should expect green rushes[3.57] to be strowed  After such discontinuance. Young Geraldine.  Mistress Prue,  I have not seen you long, but greet you thus:  May you be lady of a better husband  Than I expect a wife! Wincott.  I like that greeting.  Nay, enter, gentlemen; dinner perhaps  Is not yet ready, but the time we stay,  Weﾕll find some fresh discourse to spend away.  [_Exeunt all but_ Delavil. Delavil.  Not speak to me, nor once vouchsafe an answer,  But slight me with a poor and base neglect!  No, nor so much as cast an eye on her,  Or least regard, though in a seeming show  She courted a reply! ﾕTwixt him and her,  Nay, him and me, this was not wont to be;  If she have brain to apprehend as much  As I have done, sheﾕll quickly find it out.--   [_Re-enter_ Young Geraldine _and_ Wife.]  Now, as I live, as our affections meet,  So our conceits, and she hath singled him  To some such purpose. Iﾕll retire myself,  Not interrupt their conference. [_Exit_. Wife.  You are sad, sir. Young Geraldine.  I know no cause. Wife.  Then can I show you some.  Who could be otherways, to leave a father  So careful, and each way so provident?  To leave so many and such worthy friends?  To abandon your own country? These are some;  Nor do I think you can be much the merrier  For my sake. Young Geraldine.  Now your tongue speaks oracles;  For all the rest are nothing: ﾕtis for you--  Only for you I cannot. Wife.  So I thought;  Why, then, have you been all this while so strange?  Why will you travel, suing a divorce  Betwixt us of a love inseparable;  For here shall I be left as desolate  Unto a frozen, almost widowed bed,  Warmed only in that future stored in you;  For who can in your absence comfort me? Young Geraldine.  [_Aside_.] Shall my oppress重 sufferance yet break forth  Into impatience, or endure her more? Wife.  But since by no persuasion, no entreats,  Your settled obstinacy can be swayed,  Though you seem desperate of your own dear life,  Have care of mine, for it exists in you.  Oh, sir, should you miscarry I were lost,  Lost and forsaken! Then, by our past vows,  And by this hand once given me, by these tears  Which are but springs begetting greater floods,  I do beseech thee, my dear Geraldine,  Look to thy safety, and preserve thy health;  Have care into what company you fall;  Travel not late, and cross no dangerous seas;  For till Heavens bless me in thy safe return,  How will this poor heart suffer! Young Geraldine.  [_Aside_.] I had thought  Long since the sirens had been all destroyed;  But one of them I find survives in her:  She almost makes me question what I know,  A heretic unto my own belief:--  O thou mankindﾕs seducer! Wife.  What, no answer! Young Geraldine.  Yes, thou hast spoke to me in showers; I will  Reply in thunder: thou adulteress,  That hast more poison in thee than the serpent  Who was the first that did corrupt thy sex,  The devil! Wife.  To whom speaks the man? Young Geraldine.  To thee,  Falsest of all that ever man termed fair.  Hath impudence so steeled thy smooth soft skin,  It cannot blush? Or sin so obdured thy heart,  It doth not quake and tremble? Search thy conscience;  There thou shalt find a thousand clamorous tongues  To speak as loud as mine doth. Wife.  Save from yours,  I hear no noise at all. Young Geraldine.  Iﾕll play the doctor  To open thy deaf ears. Monday the ninth  Of the last month--canst thou remember that,  That night more black in thy abhorr重 sin  Than in the gloomy darkness?--that the time. Wife.  Monday! Young Geraldine.  Wouldst thou the place know?--thy polluted chamber,  So often witness of my sinless vows.  Wouldst thou the person?--one not worthy name,  Yet, to torment thy guilty soul the more,  Iﾕll tell him thee--that monster Delavil.  Wouldst thou your bawd know?--midnight, that the hour.  The very words thou spake?--ﾒNow what would Geraldine  Say, if he saw us here?ﾓ--to which was answered,  ﾒTush, heﾕs a coxcomb, fit to be so fooled!ﾓ  No blush! What, no faint fever on thee yet!  How hath thy black sins changed thee! Thou Medusa!  Those hairs that late appeared like golden wires  Now crawl with snakes and adders. Thou art ugly. Wife.  And yet my glass, till now, neﾕer told me so.  Who gave you this intelligence? Young Geraldine.  Only He  That, pitying such an innocency as mine  Should by two such delinquents be betrayed,--  He brought me to that place by miracle,  And made me an ear-witness of all this. Wife.  I am undone! Young Geraldine.  But think what thou hast lost  To forfeit me! I, notwithstanding these,  (So fix重 was my love and unalterable,)  I kept this from thy husband, nay, all ears,  With thy transgressions smothering mine own wrongs,  In hope of thy repentance. Wife.  Which begins  Thus low upon my knees-- Young Geraldine.  Tush! bow to Heaven,  Which thou hast most offended; I, alas!  Save in such scarce unheard-of treachery,  Most sinful, like thyself. Wherein, oh, wherein  Hath my unspotted and unbounded love  Deserved the least of these? Sworn to be made a stale  For term of life, and all this for my goodness!  Die, and die soon; acquit me of my oath,  But prithee die repentant. Farewell ever:  ﾕTis thou, and only thou, hast banished me  Both from my friends and country. Wife.  Oh, I am lost! [_Sinks down_.  _Re-enter_ Delavil, _meeting_ Young Geraldine _going out_. Delavil.  Why, how now, whatﾕs the business? Young Geraldine.  Go, take her up, whom thou hast oft thrown down.  Villain! [_Exit_. Delavil.  That was no language from a friend,  It had too harsh an accent. But howﾕs this?  My mistress thus low cast upon the earth,  Grovelling and breathless! Mistress, lady, sweet-- Wife.  Oh, tell me if thy name be Geraldine:  Thy very looks will kill me! Delavil.  View me well;  I am no such man; see, I am Delavil. Wife.  Thouﾕrt then a devil, that presents before me  My horrid sins, persuades me to despair,  When he, like a good angel sent from Heaven,  Besought me of repentance. Swell, sick heart,  Even till thou burst the ribs that bound thee in!  So, thereﾕs one string cracked. Flow, and flow high,  Even till thy blood distil out of mine eyes,  To witness my great sorrow. Delavil.  Faint again!  Some help within there! No attendant near?  Thus to expire! In this I am more wretched  Than all the sweet fruition of her love  Before could make me happy.  _Re-enter_ Wincott, Old Geraldine, Young Geraldine, _the two_  Lionels, Ricott, Owner, Prudentilla, _and_ Reignald; _also  enter_ Clown. Wincott.  What was he  Clamoured so loud, to mingle with our mirth  This terror and affright? Delavil.  See, sir, your wife  In these my arms expiring. Wincott.  How! Prudentilla.  My sister! Wincott.  Support her, and by all means possible  Provide for her dear safety. Old Geraldine.  See, she recovers. Wincott.  Woman, look up. Wife.  Oh, sir, your pardon!  Convey me to my chamber; I am sick,  Sick even to death. Away, thou sycophant,  Out of my sight! I have, besides thyself,  Too many sins about me. Clown.  My sweet mistress!  [Prudentilla _and_ Clown _lead_ Wife _off_. Delavil.  The storm is coming; I must provide for harbour. [_Exit_. Old Lionel.  What strange and sudden alterationﾕs this!  How quickly is this clear day overcast!  But such and so uncertain are all things  That dwell beneath the moon. Young Lionel.  A womanﾕs qualm,  Frailties that are inherent to her sex--  Soon sick, and soon recovered. Wincott.  If she misfare,  I am a man more wretched in her loss  Than had I forfeited life and estate;  She was so good a creature. Old Geraldine.  I the like  Suffered, when I my wife brought to her grave;  So you, when you were first a widower:  Come, arm yourself with patience. Ricott.  These are casualties  That are not new, but common. Reignald.  Burying of wives!--  As stale as shifting shirts, or for some servants  To flout and gull their masters. Owner.  Best to send  And see how her fit holds her.  _Re-enter_ Prudentilla _and_ Clown. Prudentilla.  Sir, my sister  In these few lines commends her last to you,  For she is now no more. Whatﾕs therein writ,  Save Heaven and you, none knows: this she desired  You would take view of, and with these words expired. Wincott.  Dead! Young Geraldine.  She hath made me then a free release  Of all the debts I owed her. Wincott.  [_Aside, reading_.] ﾒMy fear[3.58] is beyond pardon. Delavil  Hath played the villain; but for Geraldine,  He hath been each way noble; love him still.  My peace already I have made with Heaven;  Oh, be not you at war with me! my honour  Is in your hands to punish, or preserve;  I am now confessed, and only Geraldine  Hath wrought on me this unexpected good.  The ink I write with, I wish had been my blood,  To witness my repentance.ﾓ--Delavil!  Whereﾕs he? go seek him out. Clown.  I shall, I shall, sir. [_Exit_. Wincott.  The wills of dead folk should be still obeyed:  However false to me, Iﾕll not revealﾕt;  Where Heaven forgives, I pardon.--Gentlemen,  I know you all commiserate my loss;  I little thought this feast should have been turned  Into a funeral.--[_Re-enter_ Clown.] Whatﾕs the news of him? Clown.  He went presently[3.59] to the stable, put the saddle upon his  horse, put his foot into the stirrup, clapped his spurs into his  sides, and away heﾕs galloped, as if he were to ride a race for a  wager. Wincott.  All our ill lucks go with him! Farewell he!  But all my best of wishes wait on you, [_To_ Young Geraldine.  As my chief friend! This meeting, that was made  Only to take of you a parting leave,  Shall now be made a marriage of our love,  Which none save only death shall separate. Young Geraldine.  It calls me from all travel, and from henceforth  With my country I am friends. Wincott.  The lands that I have left,  You lend me for the short space of my life;  As soon as Heaven calls me, they call you lord.--  First feast, and after mourn; weﾕll, like some gallants  That bury thrifty fathers, thinkﾕt no sin  To wear blacks without, but other thoughts within.  [_Exeunt_. 